i flatter, myself, dear sister, that i shall give you some pleasure in letting you know that i have safely passed the sea, though we had the ill fortune of a storm. we were persuaded by the captain of the yacht to set out in a calm, and he pretended there was nothing so easy as to tide it over; but, after two days slowly moving, the wind blew so hard, that none of the sailors could keep their feet, and we were all sunday night tossed very handsomely. i never saw a man more frighted (sic) than the captain. for my part, i have been so lucky, neither to suffer from fear nor seasickness; though, i confess, i was so impatient to see myself once more upon dry land, that i would not stay till the yacht could get to rotterdam, but went in the long-boat to helvoetsluys, where we had voitures to carry us to the briel. i was charmed with the neatness of that little town; but my arrival at rotterdam presented me a new scene of pleasure. all the streets are paved with broad stones, and before many of the meanest artificers doors are placed seats of various coloured marbles, so neatly kept, that, i assure you, i walked almost all over the town yesterday, incognito, in my slippers without receiving one spot of dirt; and you may see the dutch maids washing the pavement of the street, with more application than ours do our bed-chambers. the town seems so full of people, with such busy faces, all in motion, that i can hardly fancy it is not some celebrated fair; but i see it is every day the same. 'tis certain no town can be more advantageously situated for commerce. here are seven large canals, on which the merchants ships come up to the very doors of their houses. the shops and warehouses are of a surprising neatness and magnificence, filled with an incredible quantity of fine merchandise, and so much cheaper than what we see in england, that i have much ado to persuade myself i am still so near it. here is neither dirt nor beggary to be seen. one is not shocked with those loathsome cripples, so common in london, nor teased with the importunity of idle fellows and wenches, that chuse (sic) to be nasty and lazy. the common servants, and little shop-women, here, are more nicely clean than most of our ladies; and the great variety of neat dresses (every woman dressing her head after her own fashion) is an additional pleasure in seeing the town. you see, hitherto, i make no complaints, dear sister; and if i continue to like travelling as i do at present, i shall not repent my project. it will go a great way in making me satisfied with it, if it affords me an opportunity of entertaining you. but it is not from holland that you may expect a disinterested offer. i can write enough in the stile (sic) of rotterdam, to tell you plainly, in one word that i expect returns of all the london news. you see i have already learnt to make a good bargain; and that it is not for nothing i will so much as tell you, i am your affectionate sister.
i make haste to tell you, dear madam, that, after all the dreadful fatigues you threatened me with, i am hitherto very well pleased with my journey. we take care to make such short stages every day, that i rather fancy myself upon parties of pleasure, than upon the road; and sure nothing can be more agreeable than travelling in holland. the whole country appears a large garden; the roads are well paved, shaded on each side with rows of trees, and bordered with large canals, full of boats, passing and repassing. every twenty paces gives you the prospect of some villa, and every four hours that of a large town, so surprisingly neat, i am sure you would be charmed with them. the place i am now at is certainly one of the finest villages in the world. here are several squares finely built, and (what i think a particular beauty) the whole set with thick large trees. the vour-hout is, at the same time, the hyde-park and mall of the people of quality; for they take the air in it both on foot and in coaches. there are shops for wafers, cool liquors, &c.—i have been to see several of the most celebrated gardens, but i will not teaze (sic) you with their descriptions. i dare say you think my letter already long enough. but i must not conclude without begging your pardon, for not obeying your commands, in sending the lace you ordered me. upon my word, i can yet find none, that is not dearer than you may buy it at london. if you want any india goods, here are great variety of penny-worths; and i shall follow your orders with great pleasure and exactness; being, dear madam, &c. &c.
i am extremely sorry, my dear s. that your fears of disobliging your relations, and their fears for your health and safety, have hindered me from enjoying the happiness of your company, and you the pleasure of a diverting journey. i receive some degree of mortification from every agreeable novelty, or pleasing prospect, by the reflection of your having so unluckily missed the delight which i know it would have given you. if you were with me in this town, you would be ready to expect to receive visits from your nottingham friends. no two places were ever more resembling; one has but to give the maese the name of the trent, and there is no distinguishing the prospect. the houses, like those of nottingham, are built one above another, and are intermixed in the same manner with trees and gardens. the tower they call julius caesar's, has the same situation with nottingham castle; and i cannot help fancying, i see from it the trentfield, adboulton, places so well known to us. 'tis true, the fortifications make a considerable difference. all the learned in the art of war bestow great commendations on them; for my part, that know nothing of the matter, i shall content myself with telling you, 'tis a very pretty walk on the ramparts, on which there is a tower, very deservedly called the belvidera; where people go to drink coffee, tea, &c. and enjoy one of the finest prospects in the world. the public walks have no great beauty but the thick shade of the trees, which is solemnly delightful. but i must not forget to take notice of the bridge, which appeared very surprising to me. it is large enough to hold hundreds of men, with horses and carriages. they give the value of an english two-pence to get upon it, and then away they go, bridge and all, to the other side of the river, with so slow a motion, one is hardly sensible of any at all. i was yesterday at the french church, and stared very much at their manner of service. the parson clapped on a broad-brimmed hat in the first place, which gave him entirely the air of what d'ye call him, in bartholomew fair, which he kept up by extraordinary antic gestures, and preaching much such stuff as the other talked to the puppets. however, the congregation seemed to receive it with great devotion; and i was informed by some of his flock, that he is a person of particular fame amongst them. i believe, by this time, you are as much tired with my account of him, as i was with his sermon; but i am sure your brother will excuse a digression in favour of the church of england. you know speaking disrespectfully of the calvinists, is the same thing as speaking honourably of the church. adieu, my dear s. always remember me; and be assured i can never forget you, &c. &c.
if my lady —— could have any notion of the fatigues that i have suffered these two last days, i am sure she would own it a great proof of regard, that i now sit down to write to her. we hired horses from nimeguen hither, not having the conveniency (sic) of the post, and found but very indifferent accommodations at reinberg, our first stage; but it was nothing to what i suffered yesterday. we were in hopes to reach cologn; our horses tired at stamel, three hours from it, where i was forced to pass the night in my clothes, in a room not at all better than a hovel; for though i have my bed with me, i had no mind to undress, where the wind came from a thousand places. we left this wretched lodging at day-break, and about six this morning came safe here, where i got immediately into bed. i slept so well for three hours, that i found myself perfectly recovered, and have had spirits enough to go and see all that is curious in the town, that is to say, the churches, for here is nothing else worth seeing. this is a very large town, but the most part of it is old built. the jesuits church, which is the neatest, was shewed (sic) me, in a very complaisant manner, by a handsome young jesuit; who, not knowing who i was, took a liberty in his compliments and railleries, which very much diverted me. having never before seen any thing of that nature, i could not enough admire the magnificence of the altars, the rich images of the saints (all massy silver) and the enchassures of the relicks (sic); though i could not help murmuring, in my heart, at the profusion of pearls, diamonds, and rubies, bestowed on the adornment of rotten teeth, and dirty rags. i own that i had wickedness enough to covet st ursula's pearl necklaces; though perhaps this was no wickedness at all, an image not being certainly one's neighbour's; but i went yet farther, and wished the wench herself converted into dressing-plate. i should also gladly see converted into silver, a great st christopher, which i imagine would look very well in a cistern. these were my pious reflections: though i was very well satisfied to see, piled up to the honour of our nation, the skulls of the eleven thousand virgins. i have seen some hundreds of relicks here of no less, consequence; but i will not imitate the common stile (sic) of travellers so far, as to give you a list of them; being persuaded, that you have no manner of curiosity for the titles given to jaw-bones and bits of worm-eaten wood.—adieu, i am just going to supper, where i shall drink your health in an admirable sort of lorrain (sic) wine, which i am sure is the same you call burgundy in london, &c. &c.
after five days travelling post, i could not sit down to write on any other occasion, than to tell my dear lady, that i have not forgot her obliging command, of sending her some account of my travels. i have already passed a large part of germany, have seen all that is remarkable in cologn, frankfort, wurtsburg, and this place. 'tis impossible not to observe the difference between the free towns and those under the government of absolute princes, as all the little sovereigns of germany are. in the first, there appears an air of commerce and plenty. the streets are well-built, and full of people, neatly and plainly dressed. the shops are loaded with merchandise, and the commonalty are clean and cheerful. in the other you see a sort of shabby finery, a number of dirty people of quality tawdered (sic) out; narrow nasty streets out of repair, wretchedly thin of inhabitants, and above half of the common sort asking alms. i cannot help fancying one under the figure of a clean dutch citizen's wife, and the other like a poor town lady of pleasure, painted and ribboned out in her head-dress, with tarnished silver-laced shoes, a ragged under-petticoat, a miserable mixture of vice and poverty.—they have sumptuary laws in this town, which distinguish their rank by their dress, prevent the excess which ruins so many other cities, and has a more agreeable effect to the eye of a stranger, than our fashions. i need not be ashamed to own, that i wish these laws were in force in other parts of the world. when one considers impartially, the merit of a rich suit of clothes in most places, the respect and the smiles of favour it procures, not to speak of the envy and the sighs it occasions (which is very often the principal charm to the wearer), one is forced to confess, that there is need of an uncommon understanding to resift the temptation of pleasing friends and mortifying rivals; and that it is natural to young people to fall into a folly, which betrays them to that want of money which is the source of a thousand basenesses (sic). what numbers of men have begun the world with generous inclinations, that have afterwards been the instruments of bringing misery on a whole people, being led by vain expence (sic) into debts that they could clear no other way but by the forfeit of their honour, and which they never could have contracted, if the respect the multitude pays to habits, was fixed by law, only to a particular colour or cut of plain cloth! these reflections draw after them others that are too melancholy. i will make haste to put them out of your head by the farce of relicks, with which i have been entertained in all romish churches.
the lutherans are not quite free from these follies. i have seen here, in the principal church, a large piece of the cross set in jewels, and the point of the spear, which they told me very gravely, was the same that pierced the side of our saviour. but i was particularly diverted in a little roman catholic church which is permitted here, where the professors of that religion are not very rich, and consequently cannot adorn their images in so rich a manner as their neighbour. for, not to be quite destitute of all finery, they have dressed up an image of our saviour over the altar, in a fair full-bottomed wig very well powdered. i imagine i see your lady ship stare at this article, of which you very much doubt the veracity; but, upon my word, i have not yet made use of the privilege of a traveller; and my whole account is written with the same plain sincerity of heart, with which i assure you that i am, dear madam, yours, &c. &c.
i had the pleasure of receiving yours, but the day before i left london. i give you a thousand thanks for your good wishes, and have such an opinion of their efficacy that, i am persuaded, i owe in part, to them, the good luck of having proceeded so far on my long journey without any ill accident. for i don't reckon it any, to have been stopped a few days in this town by a cold, since it has not only given me an opportunity of seeing all that is curious in it, but of making some acquaintance with the ladies, who have all been to see me with great civility, particularly madame ——, the wife of our king's envoy from hanover. she has carried me to all the assemblies, and i have been magnificently entertained at her house, which is one of the finest here. you know, that all the nobility of this place are envoys from different states. here are a great number of them, and they might pass their time agreeably enough, if they were less delicate on the point of ceremony. but instead of joining in the design of making the town as pleasant to one another as they can, and improving their little societies, they amuse themselves no other way than with perpetual quarrels, which they take care to eternize (sic), by leaving them to their successors; and an envoy to ratisbon receives, regularly, half a dozen quarrels, among the perquisites of his employment. you may be sure the ladies are not wanting, on their side, in cherishing and improving these important picques, which divide the town almost into as many parties, as there are families. they chuse rather to suffer the mortification of sitting almost alone on their assembly nights, than to recede one jot from their pretensions. i have not been here above a week, and yet i have heard from almost every one of them the whole history of their wrongs, and dreadful complaint of the injustice of their neighbours, in hopes to draw me to their party. but i think it very prudent to remain neuter, though, if i was to stay amongst them, there would be no possibility of continuing so, their quarrels running so high, that they will not be civil to those that visit their adversaries. the foundation of these everlasting disputes, turns entirely upon rank, place, and the title of excellency, which they all pretend to; and, what is very hard, will give it to no body. for my part, i could not forbear advising them, (for the public good) to give the title of excellency to every body; which would include the receiving it from every body; but the very mention of such a dishonourable peace, was received with as much indignation, as mrs blackaire did the motion of a reference. and indeed, i began to think myself ill-natured, to offer to take from them, in a town where there are so few diversions, so entertaining an amusement. i know that my peaceable disposition already gives me a very ill figure, and that 'tis publicly whispered as a piece of impertinent pride in me, that i have hitherto been saucily civil to every body, as if i thought nobody good enough to quarrel with. i should be obliged to change my behaviour, if i did not intend to pursue my journey in a few days. i have been to see the churches here, and had the permission of touching the relicks, which was never suffered in places where i was not known. i had, by this privilege, the opportunity of making an observation, which i doubt not might have been made in all the other churches, that the emeralds and rubies which they show round their relicks and images are most of them false; though they tell you that many of the crosses and madonas (sic), set round with these stones, have been the gifts of emperors and other great princes. i don't doubt, indeed, but they were at first jewels of value; but the good fathers have found it convenient to apply them to other uses, and the people are just as well satisfied with bits of glass amongst these relicks. they shewed me a prodigious claw set in gold, which they called the claw of a griffin; and i could not forbear asking the reverend priest that shewed it, whether the griffin was a saint? the question almost put him beside his gravity; but he answered, they only kept it as a curiosity. i was very much scandalised at a large silver image of the trinity, where the father is represented under the figure of a decrepit old man, with a beard down to his knees, and triple crown on his head, holding in his arms the son, fixed on the cross, and the holy ghost, in the shape of a dove, hovering over him. madam —— is come this minute to call me to the assembly, and forces me to tell you, very abruptly, that i am ever your, &c. &c.
i am now, my dear sister, safely arrived at vienna; and, i thank god, have not at all suffered in my health, nor (what is dearer to me) in that of my child, by all our fatigues. we travelled by water from ratisbon, a journey perfectly agreeable, down the danube, in one of those little vessels, that they, very properly, call wooden houses, having in them all the conveniences of a palace, stoves in the chambers, kitchens, &c. they are rowed by twelve men each, and move with such incredible swiftness, that in the same day you have the pleasure of a vast variety of prospects; and, within the space of a few hours, you have the pleasure of seeing a populous city adorned with magnificent palaces, and the most romantic solitudes, which appear distant from the commerce of mankind, the banks of the danube being charmingly diversified with woods, rocks, mountains covered with vines, fields of corn, large cities, and ruins of ancient castles. i saw the great towns of passau and lintz, famous for the retreat of the imperial court, when vienna was besieged. this town, which has the honour of being the emperor's residence, did not at all answer my expectation, nor ideas of it, being much less than i expected to find it; the streets are very close, and so narrow, one cannot observe the fine fronts of the palaces, though many of them very well deserve observation, being truly magnificent. they are built of fine white stone, and are excessive high. for as the town is too little for the number of the people that desire to live in it, the builders seem to have projected to repair that misfortune, by clapping one town on the top of another, most of the houses being of five, and some of them six stories. you may easily imagine, that the streets being so narrow, the rooms are extremely dark; and, what is an inconveniency much more intolerable, in my opinion, there is no house has so few as five or six families in it. the apartments of the greatest ladies, and even of the ministers of state, are divided, but by a partition, from that of a taylor (sic) or shoemaker; and i know no body that has above two floors in any house, one for their own use, and one higher for their servants. those that have houses of their own, let out the rest of them to whoever will take them; and thus the great stairs, (which are all of stone) are as common and as dirty as the street. 'tis true, when you have once travelled through them, nothing can be more surprisingly magnificent than the apartments. they are commonly a suite of eight or ten large rooms, all inlaid, the doors and windows richly carved and gilt, and the furniture, such as is seldom seen in the palaces of sovereign princes in other countries. their apartments are adorned with hangings of the finest tapestry of brussels, prodigious large looking glasses in silver frames, fine japan tables, beds, chairs, canopies, and window curtains of the richest genoa damask or velvet, almost covered with gold lace or embroidery. all this is made gay by pictures, and vast jars of japan china, and large lustres of rock crystal. i have already had the honour of being invited to dinner by several of the first people of quality; and i must do them the justice to say, the good taste and magnificence of their tables, very well answered to that of their furniture. i have been more than once entertained with fifty dishes of meat all served in silver, and well dressed; the desert (sic) proportionable, served in the finest china. but the variety and richness of their wines, is what appears the most surprising. the constant way is, to lay a list of their names upon the plates of the guests, along with the napkins; and i have counted several times to the number of eighteen different sorts, all exquisite in their kinds. i was yesterday at count schoonbourn, the vice-chancellor's garden, where i was invited to dinner. i must own, i never saw a place so perfectly delightful as the fauxburg (sic) of vienna. it is very large, and almost wholly composed of delicious palaces. if the emperor found it proper to permit the gates of the town to be laid open, that the fauxburg might be joined to it, he would have one of the largest and best built cities in europe. count schoonbourn's villa is one of the most magnificent; the furniture all rich brocades, so well fancied and fitted up, nothing can look more gay and splendid; not to speak of a gallery, full of rarities of coral, mother of pearl, and, throughout the whole house, a profusion of gilding, carving, fine paintings, the most beautiful porcelain, statues of alabaster and ivory, and vast orange and lemon trees in gilt pots. the dinner was perfectly fine and well ordered, and made still more agreeable by the good humour of the count. i have not yet been at court, being forced to stay for my gown, without which there is no waiting on the empress; though i am not without great impatience to see a beauty that has been the admiration of so many different nations. when i have had that honour, i will not fail to let you know my real thoughts, always taking a particular pleasure in communicating them to my dear sister.
though i have so lately troubled you, my dear sister, with a long letter, yet i will keep my promise in giving you an account of my first going to court. in order to that ceremony, i was squeezed up in a gown, and adorned with a gorget and the other implements thereunto belonging; a dress very inconvenient, but which certainly shows the neck and shape to great advantage. i cannot forbear giving you some description of the fashions here, which are more monstrous, and contrary to all common sense and reason, than 'tis possible for you to imagine. they build certain fabrics of gauze on their heads, about a yard high, consisting of three or four stories, fortified with numberless yards of heavy ribbon. the foundation of this structure is a thing they call a bourle, which is exactly of the same shape and kind, but about four times as big as those rolls our prudent milk-maids make use of to fix their pails upon. this machine they cover with their own hair, which they mix with a great deal of false, it being a particular beauty to have their heads too large to go into a moderate tub. their hair is prodigiously powdered to conceal the mixture, and set out with three or four rows of bodkins (wonderfully large, that stick out two or three inches from their hair) made of diamonds, pearls, red, green, and yellow stones, that it certainly requires as much art and experience to carry the load upright, as to dance upon may-day with the garland. their whale-bone petticoats outdo ours by several yards, circumference, and cover some acres of ground. you may easily suppose how this extraordinary dress sets off and improves the natural ugliness, with which god almighty has been pleased to endow them, generally speaking. even the lovely empress herself is obliged to comply, in some degree, with these absurd fashions, which they would not quit for all the world. i had a private audience (according to ceremony) of half an hour, and then all the other ladies were permitted to come and make their court. i was perfectly charmed with the empress; i cannot however tell you that her features are regular; her eyes are not large, but have a lively look full of sweetness; her complexion the finest i ever saw; her nose and forehead well made, but her mouth has ten thousand charms, that touch the soul. when she smiles, 'tis with a beauty and sweetness that forces adoration. she has a vast quantity of fine fair hair; but then her person!—one must speak of it poetically to do it rigid justice; all that the poets have said of the mien of juno, the air of venus, come not up to the truth. the graces move with her; the famous statue of medicis was not formed with more delicate proportions; nothing can be added to the beauty of her neck and hands. till i saw them, i did not believe there were any in nature so perfect, and i was almost sorry that my rank here did not permit me to kiss them; but they are kissed sufficiently; for every body that waits on her pays that homage at their entrance, and when they take leave. when the ladies were come in, she sat down to quinze. i could not play at a game i had never seen before, and she ordered me a seat at her right hand, and had the goodness to talk to me very much, with that grace so natural to her. i expected every moment, when the men were to come in to pay their court; but this drawing-room is very different from that of england; no man enters it but the grand-master, who comes in to advertise the empress of the approach of the emperor. his imperial majesty did me the honour of speaking to me in a very obliging manner; but he never speaks to any of the other ladies; and the whole passes with a gravity and air of ceremony that has something very formal in it. the empress amelia, dowager of the late emperor joseph, came this evening to wait on the reigning empress, followed by the two arch-duchesses her daughters, who are very agreeable young princesses. their imperial majesties rose and went to meet her at the door of the room, after which she was seated in an armed (sic) chair, next the empress, and in the same manner at supper, and there the men had the permission of paying their court. the arch-duchesses sat on chairs with backs without arms. the table was entirely served, and all the dishes set on by the empress's maids of honour, which are twelve young ladies of the first quality. they have no salary, but their chamber at court, where they live in a sort of confinement, not being suffered to go to the assemblies or public places in town, except in compliment to the wedding of a sister maid, whom the empress always presents with her picture set in diamonds. the three first of them are called ladies of the key, and wear gold keys by their sides; but what i find most pleasant, is the custom, which obliges them, as long as they live, after they have left the empress's service, to make her some present every year on the day of her feast. her majesty is served by no married women but the grande maitresse, who is generally a widow of the first quality, always very old, and is at the same time groom of the stole, and mother of the maids. the dressers are not, at all, in the figure they pretend to in england, being looked upon no otherwise than as downright chambermaids. i had an audience next day of the empress mother, a princess of great virtue and goodness, but who picques herself too much on a violent devotion. she is perpetually performing extraordinary acts of penance, without having ever done any thing to deserve them. she has the same number of maids of honour, whom she suffers to go in colours; but she herself never quits her mourning; and sure nothing can be more dismal than the mourning here, even for a brother. there is not the least bit of linen to be seen; all black crape (sic) instead of it. the neck, ears and side of the face are covered with a plaited piece of the same stuff, and the face that peeps out in the midst of it, looks as if it were pilloried. the widows wear over and above, a crape forehead cloth; and, in this solemn weed, go to all the public places of diversion without scruple. the next day i was to wait on the empress amelia, who is now at her palace of retirement, half a mile from the town. i had there the pleasure of seeing a diversion wholly new to me, but which is the common amusement of this court. the empress herself was seated on a little throne at the end of the fine alley in the garden, and on each side of her were ranged two parties of her ladies of quality, headed by two young archduchesses, all dressed in their hair, full of jewels, with fine light guns in their hands; and at proper distances were placed three oval pictures, which were the marks to be shot at. the first was that of a cupid, filling a bumper of burgundy, and the motto, 'tis easy to be valiant here. the second a fortune, holding a garland in her hand, the motto, for her whom fortune favours. the third was a sword, with a laurel wreath on the point, the motto, here is no shame to be vanquished.—near the empress was a gilded trophy wreathed with flowers, and made of little crooks, on which were hung rich turkish handkerchiefs, tippets, ribbons, laces, &c. for the small prizes. the empress gave the first with her own hand, which was a fine ruby ring set round with diamonds, in a gold snuff-box. there was for the second, a little cupid set with brilliants, and besides these a set of fine china for the tea-table, enchased in gold, japan trunks, fans, and many gallantries of the same nature. all the men of quality at vienna were spectators; but the ladies only had permission to shoot, and the arch-duchess amelia carried off the first prize. i was very well pleased with having seen this entertainment, and i do not know but it might make as good a figure as the prize-shooting in the eneid, if i could write as well as virgil. this is the favourite pleasure of the emperor, and there is rarely a week without some feast of this kind, which makes the young ladies skilful enough to defend a fort. they laughed very much to see me afraid to handle a gun. my dear sister, you will easily pardon an abrupt conclusion. i believe, by this time, you are ready to think i shall never conclude at all.
i am extremely rejoiced, but not at all surprised, at the long, delightful letter, you have had the goodness to send me. i know that you can think of an absent friend even in the midst of a court, and you love to oblige, where you can have no view of a return; and i expect from you that you should love me, and think of me, when you don't see me. i have compassion for the mortifications that you tell me befel (sic) our little old friend, and i pity her much more, since i know, that they are only owing to the barbarous customs of our country. upon my word, if she were here, she would have no other fault but that of being something too young for the fashion, and she has nothing to do but to transplant herself hither about seven years hence, to be again a young and blooming beauty. i can assure you, that wrinkles, or a small stoop in the shoulders, nay, even gray-hairs (sic), are no objection to the making new conquests. i know you cannot easily figure to yourself, a young fellow of five and twenty, ogling my lady s-ff—k with passion, or pressing to hand the countess of o——d from an opera. but such are the sights i see every day, and i don't perceive any body surprized (sic) at them but myself. a woman, till five and thirty, is only looked upon as a raw girl, and can possibly make no noise in the world, till about forty. i don't know what your ladyship may think of this matter; but 'tis a considerable comfort to me, to know there is upon earth such a paradise for old women; and i am content to be insignificant at present, in the design of returning when i am fit to appear no where else. i cannot help, lamenting, on this occasion, the pitiful case of too many english ladies, long since retired to prudery and ratafia, who, if their stars had luckily conducted hither, would shine in the first rank of beauties. besides, that perplexing word reputation, has quite another meaning here than what you give it at london; and getting a lover is so far from losing, that 'tis properly getting reputation; ladies being much more respected in regard to the rank of their lovers, than that of their husbands.
but what you'll think very odd, the two sects that divide our whole nation of petticoats, are utterly unknown in this place. here are neither coquettes nor prudes. no woman dares appear coquette enough to encourage two lovers at a time. and i have not seen any such prudes as to pretend fidelity to their husbands, who are certainly the best natured set of people in the world, and look upon their wives' gallants as favourably as men do upon their deputies, that take the troublesome part of their business off their hands. they have not however the less to do on that account; for they are generally deputies in another place themselves; in one word, 'tis the established custom for every lady to have two husbands, one that bears the name, and another that performs the duties. and the engagements are so well known, that it would be a downright affront, and publicly resented, if you invited a woman of quality to dinner, without, at the same time, inviting her two attendants of lover and husband, between whom she sits in state with great gravity. the sub-marriages generally last twenty years together, and the lady often commands the poor lover's estate, even to the utter ruin of his family. these connections, indeed, are as seldom begun by any real passion as other matches; for a man makes but an ill figure that is not in some commerce of this nature; and a woman looks out for a lover as soon as she's married, as part of her equipage, without which she could not be genteel; and the first article of the treaty is establishing the pension, which remains to the lady, in case the gallant should prove inconstant. this chargeable point of honour, i look upon as the real foundation of so many wonderful influences of constancy. i really know some women of the first quality, whose pensions are as well known as their annual rents, and yet nobody esteems them the less; on the contrary, their discretion would be called in question, if they should be suspected to be mistresses for nothing. a great part of their emulation consists in trying who shall get most; and having no intrigue at all, is so far a disgrace, that, i'll assure you, a lady, who is very much my friend here, told me but yesterday, how much i was obliged to her for justifying my conduct in a conversation relating to me, where it was publicly asserted, that i could not possibly have common sense, since i had been in town above a fortnight, and had made no steps towards commencing an amour. my friend pleaded for me, that my stay was uncertain, and she believed that was the cause of my seeming stupidity; and this was all she could find to say in my justification. but one of the pleasantest adventures i ever met with in my life was last night, and it will give you a just idea in what a delicate manner the belles passions are managed in this country. i was at the assembly of the countess of ——-, and the young count of ——- leading me down stairs, asked me how long i was to stay at vienna? i made answer, that my stay depended on the emperor, and it was not in my power to determine it. well, madam, (said he) whether your time here is to be longer or shorter, i think you ought to pass it agreeably, and to that end you must engage in a little affair of the heart.—my heart, (answered i gravely enough) does not engage very easily, and i have no design of parting with it. i see, madam, (said he sighing) by the ill nature of that answer, i am not to hope for it, which is a great mortification to me that am charmed with you. but, however, i am still devoted to your service; and since i am not worthy of entertaining you myself, do me the honour of letting me know whom you like best amongst us, and i'll engage to manage the affair entirely to your satisfaction. you may judge in what manner i should have received this compliment in my own country; but i was well enough acquainted with the way of this, to know that he really intended me an obligation, and i thanked him with a very grave courtesy for his zeal to serve me, and only assured him, i had no occasion to make use of it. thus you see, my dear, that gallantry and good-breeding are as different, in different climates, as morality and religion. who have the rightest (sic) notions of both, we shall never know till the day of judgment; for which great day of eclaircissement, i own there is very little impatience in your, &c. &c.
i was never more agreeably surprised than by your obliging letter. 'tis a peculiar mark of my esteem that i tell you so; and i can assure you, that if i loved you one grain less than i do, i should be very sorry to see it so diverting as it is. the mortal aversion i have to writing, makes me tremble at the thoughts of a new correspondent; and i believe i have disobliged no less than a dozen of my london acquaintance by refusing to hear from them, though i did verily think they intended to send me very entertaining letters. but i had rather lose the pleasure of reading several witty things, than be forced to write many stuped (sic) ones. yet, in spite of these considerations, i am charmed with the proof of your friendship, and beg a continuation of the same goodness, though i fear the dulness of this will make you immediately repent of it. it is not from austria that one can write with vivacity, and i am already infected with the phlegm of the country. even their amours and their quarrels are carried on with a surprising temper, and they are never lively but upon points of ceremony. there, i own, they shew all their passions; and 'tis not long since two coaches, meeting in a narrow street at night, the ladies in them not being able to adjust the ceremonial of which should go back, sat there, with equal gallantry till two in the morning, and were both so fully determined to die upon the spot rather than yield, in a point of that importance, that the street would never have been cleared till their deaths, if the emperor had not sent his guards to part them; and even then they refused to stir, till the expedient could be found out of taking them both out in chairs, exactly in the same moment. after the ladies were agreed, it was with some difficulty that the pass was decided between the two coachmen, no less tenacious of their rank than the ladies. this passion is so omnipotent in the breasts of the women, that even their husbands never die but they are ready to break their hearts, because that fatal hour puts an end to their rank, no widows having any place at vienna. the men are not much less touched with this point of honour, and they do not only scorn to marry, but even to make love to any woman of a family not as illustrious as their own; and the pedigree is much more considered by them, than either the complexion of features of their mistresses. happy are the she's (sic) that can number amongst their ancestors, counts of the empire; they have neither occasion for beauty, money, nor good conduct to get them husbands. 'tis true, as to money, 'tis seldom any advantage to the man they marry; the laws of austria confine the woman's portion to two thousand florins (about two hundred pounds english), and whatever they have beside, remains in their own possession and disposal. thus, here are many ladies much richer than their husbands, who are however obliged to allow them pin-money agreeable to their quality; and i attribute to this considerable branch of prerogative, the liberty that they take upon other occasions. i am sure, you, that know my laziness, and extreme indifference on this subject, will pity me, entangled amongst all these ceremonies, which are a wonderful burden to me, though i am the envy of the whole town, having, by their own customs, the pass before them all. they indeed, so revenge, upon the poor envoys, this great respect shewn to ambassadors, that (with all my indifference) i should be very uneasy to suffer it. upon days of ceremony they have no entrance at court, and on other days must content themselves with walking after every soul, and being the very last taken notice of. but i must write a volume to let you know all the ceremonies, and i have already said too much on so dull a subject, which however employs the whole care of the people here. i need not, after this, tell you how agreeably time slides away with me; you know as well as i do the taste of, your's, &c. &c.
you desire me, madam, to send you some accounts of the customs here, and at the same time a description of vienna. i am always willing to obey your commands; but you must, upon this occasion, take the will for the deed. if i should undertake to tell you all the particulars, in which the manners here differ from ours, i must write a whole quire of the dullest stuff that ever was read, or printed without being read. their dress agrees with the french or english in no one article, but wearing petticoats. they have many fashions peculiar to themselves; they think it indecent for a widow ever to wear green or rose colour, but all the other gayest colours at her own discretion. the assemblies here are the only regular diversion, the operas being always at court, and commonly on some particular occasion. madam rabutin has the assembly constantly every night at her house; and the other ladies, whenever they have a mind to display the magnificence of their apartments, or oblige a friend by complimenting them on the day of their saint, they declare, that on such a day the assembly shall be at their house in honour of the feast of the count or countess—such a one. these days are called days of gala, and all the friends or relations of the lady, whose saint it is, are obliged to appear in their best clothes, and all their jewels. the mistress of the house takes no particular notice of any body, nor returns any body's visit; and, whoever pleases, may go, without the formality of being presented. the company are entertained with ice in several forms, winter and summer; afterwards they divide into several parties of ombre, piquet, or conversation, all games of hazard being forbid.
i saw t'other day the gala for count altheim, the emperor's favourite, and never in my life saw so many fine clothes ill-fancied. they embroider the richest gold stuffs; and provided they can make their clothes expensive enough, that is all the taste they shew in them. on other days, the general dress is a scarf, and what you please under it.
but now i am speaking of vienna, i am sure you expect i should say something of the convents; they are of all sorts and sizes, but i am best pleased with that of st lawrence, where the ease and neatness they seem to live with, appears to be much more edifying than those stricter orders, where perpetual penance and nastiness must breed discontent and wretchedness. the nuns are all of quality. i think there are to the number of fifty. they have each of them a little cell perfectly clean, the walls of which are covered with pictures more or less fine, according to their quality. a long white stone gallery runs by all of them, furnished with the pictures of exemplary sisters; the chapel is extremely neat and richly adorned. but i could not forbear laughing at their shewing me a wooden head of our saviour, which, they assured me, spoke during the siege of vienna; and, as a proof of it, bid me mark his mouth, which had been open ever since. nothing can be more becoming than the dress of these nuns. it is a white robe, the sleeves of which are turned up with fine white callico (sic), and their head-dress the same, excepting a small veil of black crape that falls behind. they have a lower sort of serving nuns, that wait on them as their chambermaids. they receive all visits of women, and play at ombre in their chambers, with permission of their abbess, which is very easy to be obtained. i never saw an old woman so good-natured; she is near fourscore, and yet shews very little sign of decay, being still lively and cheerful. she caressed me as if i had been her daughter, giving me some pretty things of her own work, and sweetmeats in abundance. the grate is not of the most rigid; it is not very hard to put a head through, and i don't doubt but a man, a little more slender than ordinary, might squeeze in his whole person. the young count of salamis came to the grate, while i was there, and the abbess gave him her hand to kiss. but i was surprised to find here, the only beautiful young woman i have seen at vienna, and not only beautiful but genteel, witty, and agreeable, of a great family, and who had been the admiration of the town. i could not forbear shewing my surprise at seeing a nun like her. she made me a thousand obliging compliments, and desired me to come often. it will be an infinite pleasure to me, (said she, sighing) but i avoid, with the greatest care, seeing any of my former acquaintance, and whenever they come to our convent, i lock myself in my cell. i observed tears come into her eyes, which touched me extremely, and i began to talk to her in that strain of tender pity she inspired me with; but she would not own to me, that she is not perfectly happy. i have since endeavoured to learn the real cause of her retirement, without being able to get any other account, but that every body was surprised at it, and no body guessed the reason. i have been several times to see her; but it gives me too much melancholy to see so agreeable a young creature buried alive. i am not surprised that nuns have so often inspired violent passions; the pity one naturally feels for them, when they seem worthy of another destiny, making an easy way for yet more tender sentiments. i never in my life had so little charity for the roman catholick (sic) religion, as since i see the misery it occasions; so many poor unhappy women! and then the gross superstition of the common people, who are some or other of them, day and night, offering bits of candle to the wooden figures that are set up almost in every street. the processions i see very often, are a pageantry, as offensive, and apparently contradictory to common sense, as the pagods (sic) of china. god knows whether it be the womanly spirit of contradiction that works in me; but there never before was such zeal against popery in the heart of, dear madam, &c. &c.
i hope my dear sister wants no new proofs of my sincere affection for her: but i am sure, if you do, i could not give you a stronger than writing at this time, after three days, or, more properly speaking, three nights and days, hard post-travelling.—the kingdom of bohemia is the most desert of any i have seen in germany. the villages are so poor, and the post-houses so miserable, that clean straw and fair water are blessings not always to be met with, and better accommodation not to be hoped for. though i carried my own bed with me, i could not sometimes find a place to set it up in; and i rather chose to travel all night, as cold as it is, wrapped up in my furs, than go into the common stoves, which are filled with a mixture of all sorts of ill scents.
this town was once the royal seat of the bohemian king, and is still the capital of the kingdom. there are yet some remains of its former splendour, being one of the largest towns in germany, but, for the most part, old built, and thinly inhabited, which makes the houses very cheap. those people of quality, who cannot easily bear the expence of vienna, chuse to reside here, where they have assemblies, music, and all other diversions, (those of a court excepted) at very moderate rates, all things being here in great abundance, especially the best wild-fowl i ever tasted. i have already been visited by some of the most considerable ladies, whose relations i know at vienna. they are dressed after the fashions there, after the manner that the people at exeter imitate those of london; that is, their imitation is more excessive than the original. 'tis not easy to describe what extraordinary figures they make. the person is so much lost between head-dress and petticoat, that they have as much occasion to write upon their backs, "this is a woman," for the information of travellers, as ever sign-post painter had to write, "this is a bear." i will not forget to write to you again from dresden and leipzig, being much more solicitous to content your curiosity, than to indulge my own repose. i am, &c.
i believe, dear sister, you will easily forgive my not writing to you from dresden, as i promised, when i tell you, that i never went out of my chaise from prague to this place. you may imagine how heartily i was tired with twenty-four hours post-travelling, without sleep or refreshment (for i can never sleep in a coach, however fatigued.) we passed, by moon-shine, the frightful precipices that divide bohemia from saxony, at the bottom, of which runs the river elbe; but i cannot say, that i had reason to fear drowning in it, being perfectly convinced, that in case of a tumble, it was utterly impossible to come alive to the bottom. in many places, the road is so narrow, that i could not discern an inch of space between the wheels and the precipice. yet i was so good a wife, as not to wake mr w——y, who was fast asleep by my side, to make him share in my fears, since the danger was unavoidable, till i perceived, by the bright light of the moon, our postilions nodding on horse-back, while the horses were on a full gallop. then indeed i thought it very convenient to call out to desire them to look where they were going. my calling waked (sic) mr w——y, and he was much more surprised than myself at the situation we were in, and assured me, that he passed the alps five times in different places, without ever having gone a road so dangerous. i have been told since, that 'tis common to find the bodies of travellers in the elbe; but, thank god, that was not our destiny; and we came safe to dresden, so much tired with fear and fatigue, it was not possible for me to compose myself to write. after passing these dreadful rocks, dresden appeared to me a wonderfully agreeable situation, in a fine large plain on the banks of the elbe. i was very glad to stay there a day to rest myself. the town is the neatest i have seen in germany; most of the houses are new built; the elector's palace is very handsome, and his repository full of curiosities of different kinds, with a collection of medals very much esteemed. sir ——, our king's envoy, came to see me here, and madame de l——, whom i knew in london, when her husband was minister to the king of poland there. she offered me all things in her power to entertain me, and brought some ladies with her, whom she presented to me. the saxon ladies resemble the austrian no more than the chinese do those of london; they are very genteelly dressed, after the english and french modes, and have generally pretty faces, but they are the most determined minaudieres in the whole world. they would think it a mortal sin against good-breeding, if they either spoke or moved in a natural manner. they all affect a little soft lisp, and a pretty pitty-pat step; which female frailties ought, however, to be forgiven them, in favour of their civility and good nature to strangers, which i have a great deal of reason to praise.
the countess of cozelle is kept prisoner in a melancholy castle, some leagues from hence; and i cannot forbear telling you what i have heard of her, because it seems to me very extraordinary, though i foresee i shall swell my letter to the size of a pacquet.—she was mistress to the king of poland, (elector of saxony) with so absolute a dominion over him, that never any lady had so much power in that court. they tell a pleasant story of his majesty's first declaration of love, which he made in a visit to her, bringing in one hand a bag of a hundred thousand crowns, and in the other a horse-shoe, which he snapped asunder before her face, leaving her to draw the consequences of such remarkable proofs of strength and liberality. i know not which charmed her most; but she consented to leave her husband, and to give herself up to him entirely, being divorced publicly, in such a manner, as, by their laws, permits either party to marry again. god knows whether it was at this time, or in some other fond fit, but 'tis certain, the king had the weakness to make her a formal contract of marriage; which, though it could signify nothing during the life of the queen, pleased her so well, that she could not be contented, without telling it to all the people she saw, and giving herself the airs of a queen. men endure every thing while they are in love; but when the excess of passion was cooled by long possession, his majesty began to reflect on the ill consequences of leaving such a paper in her hands, and desired to have it restored to him. but she rather chose to endure all the most violent effects of his anger, than give it up; and though she is one of the richest and most avaricious ladies of her country, she has refused the offer of the continuation of a large pension, and the security of a vast sum of money she has amassed; and has, at last, provoked the king to confine her person to a castle, where she endures all the terrors of a strait imprisonment, and remains still inflexible, either to threats or promises. her violent passions have brought her indeed into fits, which 'tis supposed, will soon put an end to her life. i cannot forbear having some compassion for a woman that suffers for a point of honour, however mistaken, especially in a country where points of honour are not over scrupulously observed among ladies.
i could have wished mr w——y's business had permitted him a longer stay at dresden.
perhaps i am partial to a town where they profess the protestant religion; but every thing seemed to me with quite another air of politeness than i have found in other places. leipzig, where i am at present, is a town very considerable for its trade, and i take this opportunity of buying pages liveries, gold stuffs for myself, &c. all things of that kind being at least double the price at vienna; partly because of the excessive customs, and partly through want of genius and industry in the people, who make no one sort of thing there; so that the ladies are obliged to send, even for their shoes, out of saxony. the fair here is one of the most considerable in germany, and the resort of all the people of quality, as well as of the merchants. this is also a fortified town, but i avoid ever mentioning fortifications, being sensible that i know not how to speak of them. i am the more easy under my ignorance, when i reflect that i am sure you'll willingly forgive the omission; for if i made you the most exact description of all the ravelins and bastions i see in my travels, i dare swear you would ask me, what is a ravelin? and, what is a bastion?
adieu, my dear sister.
i am just come to brunswick, a very old town, but which has the advantage of being the capital of the duke of wolsenbuttle's dominions, a family (not to speak of its ancient honours) illustrious, by having its younger branch on the throne of england, and having given two empresses to germany. i have not forgot to drink your health here in mum, which i think very well deserves its reputation of being the best in the world. this letter is the third i have writ to you during my journey; and i declare to you, that if you don't send me immediately a full and true account of all the changes and chances among our london acquaintance, i will not write you any description of hanover (where i hope to be to-night) though i know you have more curiosity to hear of that place than any other.
i received your ladyship's letter, but the day before i left vienna, though, by the date, i ought to have had it much sooner; but nothing was ever worse regulated than the post in most parts of germany. i can assure you, the pacquet at prague was behind my chaise, and in that manner conveyed to dresden, so that the secrets of half the country were at my mercy, if i had had any curiosity for them. i would not longer delay my thanks for yours, though the number of my acquaintances here, and my duty of attending at court, leave me hardly any time to dispose of. i am extremely pleased that i can tell you, without flattery or partiality, that our young prince [footnote: the father of his present majesty.] has all the accomplishments that 'tis possible to have at his age, with an air of sprightliness and understanding, and something so very engaging and easy in his behaviour, that he needs not the advantage of his rank to appear charming. i had the honour of a long conversation with him last night, before the king came in. his governor retired on purpose (as he told me afterwards) that i might make some judgment of his genius, by hearing him speak without constraint; and i was surprised at the quickness and politeness that appeared in every thing he said; joined to a person perfectly agreeable, and the fine fair hair of the princess.
this town is neither large nor handsome; but the palace is capable of holding a much greater court than that of st james's. the king has had the goodness to appoint us a lodging in one part of it, without which we should have been very ill accommodated; for the vast number of english, crowds the town so much, 'tis very good luck to get one sorry room in a miserable tavern. i dined to-day with the portuguese ambassador, who thinks himself very happy to have two wretched parlours in an inn. i have now made the tour of germany, and cannot help observing a considerable difference between travelling here and in england. one sees none of those fine seats of noblemen, so common amongst us, nor any thing like a country gentleman's house, though they have many situations perfectly fine. but the whole people are divided into absolute sovereignties, where all the riches and magnificence are at court, or into communities of merchants, such as nurenburg (sic) and frankfort, where they live always in town for the convenience of trade. the king's company of french comedians play here every night. they are very well dressed, and some of them not ill actors. his majesty dines and sups constantly in public. the court is very numerous, and his affability and goodness make it one of the most agreeable places in the world.
dear madam, your, &c. &c.
i am very glad, my dear lady r——, that you have been so well pleased, as you tell me, at the report of my returning to england; though, like other pleasures, i can assure you it has no real foundation. i hope you know me enough to take my word against any report concerning me. 'tis true, as to distance of place, i am much nearer to london than i was some weeks ago; but, as to the thoughts of a return, i never was farther off in my life. i own, i could with great joy indulge the pleasing hopes of seeing you, and the very few others that share my esteem; but while mr w—— is determined to proceed in his design, i am determined to follow him. i am running on upon my own affairs, that is to say, i am going to write very dully, as most people do when they write of themselves. i will make haste to change the disagreeable subject, by telling you, that i am now got into the region of beauty. all the women have (literally) rosy cheeks, snowy foreheads and bosoms, jet eye-brows, and scarlet lips, to which they generally add coal-black hair. those perfections never leave them, till the hour of their deaths, and have a very fine effect by candle light; but i could wish they were handsome with a little more variety. they resemble one another as much as mrs salmon's court of great britain, and are in as much danger of melting away, by too near approaching the fire, which they for that reason carefully avoid, though 'tis now such excessive cold weather, that i believe they suffer extremely by that piece of self-denial. the snow is already very deep, and the people begin to slide about in their traineaus. this is a favourite diversion all over germany. they are little machines fixed upon a sledge, that hold a lady and gentleman, and are drawn by one horse. the gentleman has the honour of driving, and they move with a prodigious swiftness. the lady, the horse, and the traineau, are all as fine as they can be made; and when there are many of them together, 'tis a very agreeable show. at vienna, where all pieces of magnificence are carried to excess, there are sometimes machines of this kind, that cost five or six hundred pounds english. the duke of wolfenbuttle is now at this court; you know he is nearly related to our king, and uncle to the reigning empress, who is, i believe, the most beautiful princess upon earth. she is now with child, which is all the consolation of the imperial court, for the loss of the archduke. i took my leave of her the day before i left vienna, and she began to speak to me with so much grief and tenderness, of the death of that young prince, i had much ado to withhold my tears. you know that i am not at all partial to people for their titles; but i own, that i love that charming princess, (if i may use so familiar an expression) and if i had not, i should have been very much moved at the tragical end of an only son, born, after being so long desired, and at length killed by want of good management, weaning him in the beginning of the winter. adieu, dear lady r——; continue to write to me, and believe none of your goodness is lost upon your, &c.
i received your's, dear sister, the very day i left hanover. you may easily imagine i was then in too great a hurry to answer it; but you see i take the first opportunity of doing myself that pleasure. i came here the 15th, very late at night, after a terrible journey, in the worst roads and weather that ever poor traveller suffered. i have taken this little fatigue merely to oblige the reigning empress, and carry a message from her imperial majesty to the duchess of blankenburg, her mother, who is a princess of great address and good-breeding, and may be still called a fine woman. it was so late when i came to this town, i did not think it proper to disturb the duke and duchess with the news of my arrival; so i took up my quarters in a miserable inn: but as soon as i had sent my compliments to their highnesses, they immediately sent me their own coach and six horses, which had however enough to do to draw us up the very high hill on which the castle is situated. the duchess is extremely obliging to me, and this little court is not without its diversions. the duke taillys (sic) at basset every night; and the duchess tells me, she is so well pleased with my company, that it makes her play less than she used to do. i should find it very difficult to steal time to write, if she was not now at church, where i cannot wait on her, not understanding the language enough to pay my devotions in it. you will not forgive me, if i do not say something of hanover; i cannot tell you that the town is either large or magnificent. the opera house, which was built by the late elector, is much finer than that of vienna. i was very sorry that the ill weather did not permit me to see hernhausen in all its beauty; but in spite of the snow, i thought the gardens very fine. i was particularly surprised at the vast number of orange trees, much larger than any i have ever seen in england, though this climate is certainly colder. but i had more reason to wonder that night at the king's table, to see a present from a gentleman of this country, of two large baskets full of ripe oranges and lemons of different sorts, many of which were quite new to me; and what i thought worth all the rest, two ripe ananasses (sic), which, to my taste, are a fruit perfectly delicious. you know they are naturally the growth of brazil, and i could not imagine how they came here, but by enchantment. upon inquiry, i learnt that they have brought their stoves to such perfection, they lengthen their summer as long as they please, giving to every plant the degree of heat it would receive from the sun in its native soil. the effect is very near the same; i am surprised we do not practise (sic) in england so useful an invention. this reflection leads me to consider our obstinacy in shaking with cold, five months in the year rather than make use of stoves, which are certainly one of the greatest conveniencies (sic) of life. besides, they are so far from spoiling the form of a room, that they add very much to the magnificence of it, when they are painted and gilt, as they are at vienna, or at dresden, where they are often in the shapes of china jars, statues, or fine cabinets, so naturally represented, that they are not to be distinguished. if ever i return, in defiance to the fashion, you shall certainly see one in the chamber of, dear sister, your, &c.
i will write often, since you desire it: but i must beg you to be a little more particular in your's; you fancy me at forty miles distance, and forget, that, after so long an absence, i can't understand hints.
i have just received here at vienna, your ladyship's compliments on my return to england, sent me from hanover. you see, madam, all things that are asserted with confidence are not absolutely true; and that you have no sort of reason to complain of me for making my designed return a mystery to you, when you say, all the world are informed of it. you may tell all the world in my name, that they are never so well informed of my affairs as i am myself; that i am very positive i am at this time at vienna, where the carnival is begun, and all sorts of diversions are carried to the greatest height, except that of masquing (sic), which is never permitted during a war with the turks. the balls are in public places, where the men pay a gold ducat at entrance, but the ladies nothing. i am told, that these houses get sometimes a thousand ducats in a night. they are very magnificently furnished, and the music good, if they had not that detestible (sic) custom of mixing hunting horns with it, that almost deafen the company. but that noise is so agreeable here, they never make a concert without them. the ball always concludes with english country dances, to the number of thirty or forty couple, and so ill danced, that there is very little pleasure in them. they know but half a dozen, and they have danced them over and over these fifty years: i would fain have taught them some new ones, but i found it would be some months labour to make them comprehend them. last night there was an italian comedy acted at court. the scenes were pretty, but the comedy itself such intolerable low farce, without either wit or humour, that i was surprised how all the court could sit there attentively for four hours together. no women are suffered to act on the stage, and the men dressed like them, were such awkward figures, they very much added to the ridicule of the spectacle. what completed the diversion, was the excessive cold, which was so great, i thought i should have died there. it is now the very extremity of the winter here; the danube is entirely frozen, and the weather not to be supported without stoves and furs; but, however, the air so clear, almost every body is well, and colds not half so common as in england. i am persuaded there cannot be a purer air, nor more wholesome, than that of vienna. the plenty and excellence of all sorts of provisions are greater here than in any place i ever was before, and 'tis not very expensive to keep a splendid table. 'tis really a pleasure to pass through the markets, and see the abundance of what we should think rarities, of fowls and venison, that are daily brought in from hungary and bohemia. they want nothing but shell-fish, and are so fond of oysters, that they have them sent from venice, and eat them very greedily, stink or not stink. thus i obey your commands, madam, in giving you an account of vienna, though i know you will not be satisfied with it. you chide me for my laziness, in not telling you a thousand agreeable and surprising things, that you say you are sure i have seen and heard. upon my word, madam, 'tis my regard to truth, and not laziness, that i do not entertain you with as many prodigies as other travellers use to divert their readers with. i might easily pick up wonders in every town i pass through, or tell you a long series of popish miracles; but i cannot fancy, that there is any thing new in letting you know that priests will lie, and the mob believe, all the world over. then as for news, that you are so inquisitive about, how can it be entertaining to you (that don't know the people) that the prince of —— has forsaken the countess of ——? or that the prince such a one, has an intrigue with the countess such a one? would you have me write novels like the countess of d'——? and is it not better to tell you a plain truth, that i am, &c.
i am now, dear sister, to take leave of you for a long time, and of vienna for ever; designing to-morrow, to begin my journey through hungary, in spite of the excessive cold, and deep snows, which are enough to damp a greater courage than i am mistress of. but my principles of passive obedience, carries me through every thing. i have had my audience of leave of the empress. his imperial majesty was pleased to be present, when i waited on the reigning empress; and, after a very obliging conversation, both their imperial majesties invited me to take vienna in my road back; but i have no thoughts of enduring, over again, so great a fatigue. i delivered a letter from the duchess of blankenburg. i stayed but a few days at that court, though her highness pressed me very much to stay; and when i left her, engaged me to write to her. i wrote you a long letter from thence, which i hope you have received, though you don't mention it; but i believe i forgot to tell you one curiosity in all the german courts, which i cannot forbear taking notice of: all the princes keep favourite dwarfs. the emperor and empress have two of these little monsters, as ugly as devils, especially the female; but they are all bedaubed with diamonds, and stand at her majesty's elbow, in all public places. the duke of wolfenbuttle has one, and the duchess of blankenburg is not without hers, but indeed the most proportionable i ever saw. i am told the king of denmark has so far improved upon this fashion, that his dwarf is his chief minister. i can assign no reason for their fondness for these pieces of deformity, but the opinion all the absolute princes have, that it is below them to converse with the rest of mankind; and not to be quite alone, they are forced to seek their companions among the refuse of human nature, these creatures being the only part of their court privileged to talk freely to them. i am at present confined to my chamber by a sore throat; and am really glad of the excuse, to avoid seeing people, that i love well enough, to be very much mortified when i think i am going to part with them for ever. 'tis true, the austrians are not commonly the most polite people in the world, nor the most agreeable. but vienna is inhabited by all nations, and i had formed to myself a little society of such as were perfectly to my own taste. and though the number was not very great, i could never pick up, in any other place, such a number of reasonable, agreeable people. we were almost always together, and you know i have ever been of opinion, that a chosen conversation, composed of a few that one esteems, is the greatest happiness of life. here are some spaniards of both sexes, that have all the vivacity and generosity of sentiments anciently ascribed to their nation; and could i believe that the whole kingdom were like them, i would with nothing more than to end my days there. the ladies of my acquaintance have so much goodness for me, they cry whenever they see me, since i have determined to undertake this journey. and, indeed, i am not very easy when i reflect on what i am going to suffer. almost every body i see frights me with some new difficulty. prince eugene has been so good as to say all the things he could, to persuade me to stay till the danube is thawed, that i may have the conveniency of going by water; assuring me, that the houses in hungary are such, as are no defence against the weather; and that i shall be obliged to travel three or four days between buda and essek, without finding any house at all, through desert plains covered with snow; where the cold is so violent, many have been killed by it. i own these terrors have made a very deep impression on my mind, because i believe he tells me things truly as they are, and no body can be better informed of them.
now i have named that great man, i am sure you expect i should say something particular of him, having the advantage of seeing him very often; but i am as unwilling to speak of him at vienna, as i should be to talk of hercules in the court of omphale, if i had seen him there. i don't know what comfort other people find in considering the weakness of great men, (because, perhaps, it brings them nearer to their level) but 'tis always a mortification to me, to observe that there is no perfection in humanity. the young prince of portugal is the admiration of the whole court; he is handsome and polite, with a great vivacity. all the officers tell wonders of his gallantry the last campaign. he is lodged at court with all the honours due to his rank.—adieu, dear sister: this is the last account you will have from me of vienna. if i survive my journey, you shall hear from me again. i can say, with great truth, in the words of moneses (sic), i have long learnt to hold myself as nothing; but when i think of the fatigue my poor infant must suffer, i have all a mother's fondness in my eyes, and all her tender passions in my heart.
p. s. i have written a letter to my lady ——, that i believe she won't like; and, upon cooler reflection, i think i had done better to have let it alone; but i was downright peevish at all her questions, and her ridiculous imagination, that i have certainly seen abundance of wonders which i keep to myself out of mere malice. she is very angry that i won't lie like other travellers. i verily believe she expects i should tell her of the anthropophagi, men whose heads grow below their shoulders; however, pray say something to pacify her.
at length, dear sister i am safely arrived, with all my family, in good health, at peterwaradin; having suffered so little from the rigour of the season, (against which we were well provided by furs) and found such tolerable accommodation every where, by the care of sending before, that i can hardly forbear laughing, when i recollect all the frightful ideas that were given me of this journey. these, i see, were wholly owing to the tenderness of my vienna friends, and their desire of keeping me with them for this winter. perhaps it will not be disagreeable to you, to give a short journal of my journey, being through a country entirely unknown to you, and very little passed, even by the hungarians themselves, who generally chuse to take the conveniency of going down the danube. we have had the blessing of being favoured with finer weather than is common at this time of the year; though the snow was so deep, we were obliged to have our own coaches fixed upon traineaus, which move so swift and so easily, 'tis by far the most agreeable manner of travelling post. we came to raab (the second day from vienna) on the seventeenth instant, where mr w—— sending word of our arrival to the governor, the best house in the town was provided for us, the garrison put under arms, a guard ordered at our door, and all other honours paid to us. the governor, and all other officers immediately waited on mr w——, to know if there was any thing to be done for his service. the bishop of temeswar came to visit us, with great civility, earnestly pressing us to dine with him next day; which we refusing, as being resolved to pursue our journey, he sent us several baskets of winter fruit, and a great variety of hungarian wines, with a young hind just killed. this is a prelate of great power in this country, of the ancient family of nadasti, so considerable for many ages, in this kingdom. he is a very polite, agreeable, cheerful old man, wearing the hungarian habit, with a venerable white beard down to his girdle.—raab is a strong town, well garrisoned and fortified, and was a long time the frontier town between the turkish and german empires. it has its name from the river rab, on which it is situated, just on its meeting with the danube, in an open champaign (sic) country. it was first taken by the turks, under the command of bassa sinan, in the reign of sultan amurath iii. in the year fifteen hundred and ninety-four. the governor, being supposed to have betrayed it, was afterwards beheaded by the emperor's command. the counts of swartzenburg; and palsi retook it by surprise, 1598; since which time it has remained in the hands of the germans, though the turks once more attempted to gain it by stratagem in 1642. the cathedral is large and well built, which is all i saw remarkable in the town. leaving comora on the other side the river, we went the eighteenth to nosmuhl, a small village, where however, we made shift to find tolerable accommodation. we continued two days travelling between this place and buda, through the finest plains in the world, as even as if they were paved, and extremely fruitful; but for the most part desert and uncultivated, laid waste by the long wars between the turk and the emperor; and the more cruel civil war, occasioned by the barbarous persecution of the protestant religion by the emperor leopold. that prince has left behind him the character of an extraordinary piety, and was naturally of a mild merciful temper; but, putting his conscience into the hands of a jesuit, he was more cruel and treacherous to his poor hungarian subjects, than ever the turk has been to the christians; breaking, without scruple his coronation oath, and his faith, solemnly given in many public treaties. indeed, nothing can be more melancholy than in travelling through hungary, to reflect on the former flourishing state of that kingdom, and to see such a noble spot of earth almost uninhabited. such are also the present circumstances of buda (where we arrived very early the twenty-second) once the royal seat of the hungarian kings, whose palace was reckoned one of the most beautiful buildings of the age, now wholly destroyed, no part of the town having been repaired since the last siege, but the fortifications and the castle, which is the present residence of the governor general ragule, an officer of great merit. he came immediately to see us, and carried us in his coach to his house, where i was received by his lady with all possible civility, and magnificently entertained. this city is situated upon a little hill on the south side of the danube. the castle is much higher than the town, and from it the prospect is very noble. without the walls ly (sic) a vast number of little houses, or rather huts, that they call the rascian town, being altogether inhabited by that people. the governor assured me, it would furnish twelve thousand fighting men. these towns look very odd; their houses stand in rows, many thousands of them so close together, that they appear, at a little distance, like old-fashioned thatched tents. they consist, every one of them, of one hovel above, and another under ground; these are their summer and winter apartments. buda was first taken by solyman the magnificent, in 1526, and lost the following year to ferdinand i, king of bohemia. solyman regained it by the treachery of the garrison, and voluntarily gave it into the hands of king john of hungary; after whose death, his son being an infant, ferdinand laid siege to it, and the queen mother was forced to call solyman to her aid. he indeed raised the siege, but left a turkish garrison in the town, and commanded her to remove her court from thence, which she was forced to submit to, in 1541. it resisted afterwards the sieges laid to it by the marquis of brandenburg, in the year 1542; count schwartzenburg, in 1598; general rosworm, in 1602; and the duke of lorrain, commander of the emperor's forces, in 1684, to whom it yielded, in 1686, after an obstinate defence, apti bassa, the governor, being killed, fighting in the breach with a roman bravery. the loss of this town was so important, and so much resented by the turks, that it occasioned the deposing of their emperor mahomet iv. the year following.
we did not proceed on our journey till the twenty-third, when we passed through adam and todowar, both considerable towns, when in the hands of the turks, but now quite ruined. the remains, however, of some turkish towns, shew something of what they have been. this part of the country is very much overgrown with wood, and little frequented. 'tis incredible what vast numbers of wild-fowl we saw, which often live here to a good old age,—and undisturb'd by guns, in quiet sleep.—we came the five and twentieth, to mohatch, and were shewed the field near it, where lewis, the young king of hungary lost his army and his life, being drowned in a ditch, trying to fly from balybeus, general of solyman the magnificent. this battle opened the first passage for the turks into the heart of hungary.—i don't name to you the little villages, of which i can say nothing remarkable; but i'll assure you, i have always found a warm stove, and great plenty, particularly of wild boar, venison, and all kinds of gibier. the few people that inhabit hungary, live easily enough; they have no money, but the woods and plains afford them provision in great abundance; they were ordered to give us all things necessary, even what horses we pleased to demand, gratis; but mr w——y would not oppress the poor country people, by making use of this order, and always paid them to the full worth of what we had. they were so surprised at this unexpected generosity, which they are very little used to, that they always pressed upon us, at parting, a dozen of fat pheasants, or something of that sort, for a present. their dress is very primitive, being only a plain sheep's skin, and a cap and boots of the same stuff. you may easily imagine this lasts them many winters; and thus they have very little occasion for money. the twenty-sixth, we passed over the frozen danube, with all our equipage and carriages. we met on the other side general veterani, who invited us, with great civility, to pass the night at a little castle of his, a few miles off, assuring us we should have a very hard day's journey to reach essek. this we found but too true, the woods being very dangerous, and scarce passable, from the vast quantity of wolves that hoard in them. we came, however, safe, though late to essek, where we stayed a day, to dispatch a courier with letters to the bassa of belgrade; and i took that opportunity of seeing the town, which is not very large, but fair built, and well fortified. this was a town of great trade, very rich and populous, when in the hands of the turks. it is situated on the drave, which runs into the danube. the bridge was esteemed one of the most extraordinary in the world, being eight thousand paces long, and all built of oak. it was burnt, and the city laid in ashes by count lesly, 1685, but was again repaired and fortified by the turks, who, however, abandoned it in 1687. general dunnewalt then took possession of it for the emperor, in whose hands it has remained ever since, and is esteemed one of the bulwarks of hungary. the twenty-eighth, we went to bocorwar, a very large rascian town, all built after the manner i have described to you. we were met there by colonel ——, who would not suffer us to go any where but to his quarters, where i found his wife, a very agreeable hungarian lady, and his niece and daughter, two pretty young women, crowded into three or four rascian houses, cast into one, and made as neat and convenient as those places are capable of being made. the hungarian ladies are much handsomer than those of austria. all the vienna beauties are of that country; they are generally very fair and well-shaped, and their dress, i think, is extremely becoming. this lady was in a gown of scarlet velvet, lined and faced with sables, made exact to her shape, and the skirt falling to her feet. the sleeves are strait to their arms, and the stays buttoned before, with two rows of little buttons of gold, pearl, or diamonds. on their heads they wear a tassel of gold, that hangs low on one side, lined with sable, or some other fine fur.—-they gave us a handsome dinner, and i thought the conversation very polite and agreeable. they would accompany us part of our way. the twenty-ninth, we arrived here, where we were met by the commanding officer, at the head of all the officers of the garrison. we are lodged in the best apartment of the governor's house, and entertained in a very splendid manner by the emperor's order. we wait here till all points are adjusted, concerning our reception on the turkish frontiers. mr w——'s courier, which he sent from essek, returned this morning, with the bassa's answer in a purse of scarlet satin, which the interpreter here has translated. 'tis to promise him to be honourably received. i desired him to appoint where he would be met by the turkish convoy.—he has dispatched the courier back, naming betsko, a village in the midway between peterwaradin and belgrade. we shall stay here till we receive his answer.—thus, dear sister, i have given you a very particular, and (i am afraid you'll think) a tedious account of this part of my travels. it was not an affectation of shewing my reading that has made me tell you some little scraps of the history of the towns i have passed through; i have always avoided any thing of that kind, when i spoke of places that i believe you knew the story of as well as myself. but hungary being a part of the world, which i believe quite new to you, i thought you might read with some pleasure an account of it, which i have been very solicitous to get from the best hands. however, if you don't like it, 'tis in your power to forbear reading it. i am, dear sister, &c.
i am promised to have this letter carefully sent to vienna.
i have now, madam, finished a journey that has not been undertaken by any christian since the time of the greek emperors: and i shall not regret all the fatigues i have suffered in it, if it gives me an opportunity of amusing your r. h. by an account of places utterly unknown amongst us; the emperor's ambassadors, and those few english that have come hither, always going on the danube to nicopolis. but the river was now frozen, and mr w—— was so zealous for the service of his majesty, that he would not defer his journey to wait for the conveniency of that passage. we crossed the deserts of servia (sic), almost quite over-grown with wood, through a country naturally fertile. the inhabitants are industrious; but the oppression of the peasants is so great, they are forced to abandon their houses, and neglect their tillage, all they have being a prey to the janizaries, whenever they please to seize upon it. we had a guard of five hundred of them, and i was almost in tears every day, to see their insolencies (sic) in the poor villages through which we passed.—after seven days travelling through thick woods, we came to nissa, once the capital of servia, situated in a fine plain on the river nissava, in a very good air, and so fruitful a soil, that the great plenty is hardly credible. i was certainly assured, that the quantity of wine last vintage was so prodigious, that they were forced to dig holes in the earth to put it in, not having vessels enough in the town to hold it. the happiness of this plenty is scarce perceived by the oppressed people. i saw here a new occasion for my compassion. the wretches that had provided twenty waggons for our baggage from belgrade hither for a certain hire, being all sent back without payment, some of their horses lamed (sic), and others killed, without any satisfaction made for them. the poor fellows came round the house weeping and tearing their hair and beards in a most pitiful manner, without getting any thing but drubs from the insolent soldiers. i cannot express to your r. h. how much i was moved at this scene. i would have paid them the money out of my own pocket, with all my heart; but it would only have been giving so much to the aga, who would have taken it from them without any remorse. after four days journey from this place over the mountains, we came to sophia, situated in a large beautiful plain on the river isca, and surrounded with distant mountains. 'tis hardly possible to see a more agreeable landscape. the city itself is very large, and extremely populous. here are hot baths, very famous for their medicinal virtues.—four days journey from hence we arrived at philippopolis, after having passed the ridges between the mountains of haemus and rhodope, which are always covered with snow. this town is situated on a rising ground near the river hebrus, and is almost wholly inhabited by greeks; here are still some ancient christian churches. they have a bishop; and several of the richest greeks live here; but they are forced to conceal their wealth with great care, the appearance of poverty [which includes part of its inconveniencies (sic)] being all their security against feeling it in earnest. the country from hence to adrianople, is the finest in the world. vines grow wild on all the hills; and the perpetual spring they enjoy makes every thing gay and flourishing. but this climate, happy as it seems, can never be preferred to england, with all its frosts and snows, while we are blessed with an easy government, under a king, who makes his own happiness consist in the liberty of his people, and chuses rather to be looked upon as their father than their master.—this theme would carry me very far, and i am sensible, i have already tired out your r. h.'s patience. but my letter is in your hands, and you may make it as short as you please, by throwing it into the fire, when weary of reading it. i am, madam, with the greatest respect, &c.
i am now got into a new world, where every thing i see appears to me a change of scene; and i write to your ladyship with some content of mind, hoping, at least, that you will find the charms of novelty in my letters, and no longer reproach me, that i tell you nothing extraordinary. i won't trouble you with a relation of our tedious journey; but must not omit what i saw remarkable at sophia, one of the most beautiful towns in the turkish empire, and famous for its hot baths, that are resorted to both for diversion and health. i stopped here one day, on purpose to see them; and, designing to go incognito, i hired a turkish coach. these voitures are not at all like ours, but much more convenient for the country, the heat being so great, that glasses would be very troublesome. they are made a good deal in the manner of the dutch stage-coaches, having wooden lattices painted and gilded; the inside being also painted with baskets and nosegays of flowers, intermixed commonly with little poetical mottos. they are covered all over with scarlet cloth, lined with silk, and very often richly embroidered and fringed. this covering entirely hides the persons in them, but may be thrown back at pleasure, and thus permits the ladies to peep through the lattices. they hold four people very conveniently, seated on cushions, but not raised.
in one of these covered waggons (sic), i went to the bagnio about ten o'clock. it was already full of women. it is built of stone, in the shape of a dome, with no windows but in the roof, which gives light enough. there were five of these domes joined together, the outmost being less than the rest, and serving only as a hall, where the portress stood at the door. ladies of quality generally give this woman a crown or ten shillings; and i did not forget that ceremony. the next room is a very large one paved with marble, and all round it are two raised sofas of marble, one above another. there were four fountains of cold water in this room, falling first into marble basons (sic), and then running on the floor in little channels made for that purpose, which carried the streams into the next room, something less than this, with the same sort of marble sofas, but so hot with steams of sulphur proceeding from the baths joining to it, 'twas impossible to stay there with one's cloaths (sic) on. the two other domes were the hot baths, one of which had cocks of cold water turning into it, to temper it to what degree of warmth the bathers pleased to have.
i was in my travelling habit, which is a riding dress, and certainly appeared very extraordinary to them. yet there was not one of them that shewed the least surprise or impertinent curiosity, but received me with all the obliging civility possible. i know no european court, where the ladies would have behaved themselves in so polite a manner to such a stranger. i believe, upon the whole, there were two hundred women, and yet none of those disdainful smiles, and satirical whispers, that never fail in our assemblies, when any body appears that is not dressed exactly in the fashion. they repeated over and over to me; "uzelle, pek uzelle," which is nothing but, charming, very charming.—the first sofas were covered with cushions and rich carpets, on which sat the ladies; and on the second, their slaves behind them, but without any distinction of rank by their dress, all being in the state of nature, that is, in plain english, stark naked, without any beauty or defect concealed. yet there was not the least wanton smile or immodest gesture amongst them. they walked and moved with the same majestic grace, which milton describes our general mother with. there were many amongst them, as exactly proportioned as ever any goddess was drawn by the pencil of a guido or titian,—and most of their skins shiningly white, only adorned by their beautiful hair divided into many tresses, hanging on their shoulders, braided either with pearl or ribbon, perfectly representing the figures of the graces.
i was here convinced of the truth of a reflection i have often made, that if it were the fashion to go naked, the face would be hardly observed. i perceived, that the ladies of the most delicate skins and finest shapes had the greatest share of my admiration, though their faces were sometimes less beautiful than those of their companions. to tell you the truth, i had wickedness enough, to wish secretly, that mr gervais could have been there invisible. i fancy it would have very much improved his art, to see so many fine women naked, in different postures, some in conversation, some working, others drinking coffee or sherbet, and many negligently lying on their cushions, while their slaves (generally pretty girls of seventeen or eighteen) were employed in braiding their hair in several pretty fancies. in short, 'tis the women's coffee-house, where all the news of the town is told, scandal invented, &c.—they generally take this diversion once a-week (sic), and stay there at least four or five hours, without getting cold by immediate coming out of the hot bath into the cold room, which was very surprising to me. the lady, that seemed the most considerable among them, entreated me to sit by her, and would fain have undressed me for the bath. i excused myself with some difficulty. they being however all so earnest in persuading me, i was at last forced to open my shirt, and shew them my stays; which satisfied them very well; for, i saw, they believed i was locked up in that machine, and that it was not in my own power to open it, which contrivance they attributed to my husband,—i was charmed with their civility and beauty, and should have been very glad to pass more time with them; but mr w—— resolving to pursue his journey next morning early, i was in haste to see the ruins of justinian's church, which did not afford me so agreeable a prospect as i had left, being little more than a heap of stones.
adieu, madam, i am sure i have now entertained you with an account of such a sight as you never saw in your life, and what no book of travels could inform you of, as 'tis no less than death for a man to be found in one of these places.
as i never can forget the smallest of your ladyship's commands, my first business here has been to enquire after the stuffs you ordered me to look for, without being able to find what you would like. the difference of the dress here and at london is so great, the same sort of things are not proper for caftans and manteaus. however, i will not give over my search, but renew it again at constantinople, though i have reason to believe there is nothing finer than what is to be found here, as this place is at present the residence of the court. the grand signior's eldest daughter was married some few days before i came hither; and, upon that occasion, the turkish ladies display all their magnificence. the bride was conducted to her husband's house in very great splendor (sic). she is widow of the late vizier, who was killed at peterwaradin, though that ought rather to be called a contract than a marriage, since she never has lived with him; however, the greatest part of his wealth is hers. he had the permission of visiting her in the seraglio; and, being one of the handsomest men in the empire, had very much engaged her affections.—when she saw this second husband, who is at least fifty, she could not forbear bursting into tears. he is indeed a man of merit, and the declared favourite of the sultan, (which they call mosayp) but that is not enough to make him pleasing in the eyes of a girl of thirteen.
the government here is entirely in the hands of the army, the grand signior, with all his absolute power, is as much a slave as any of his subjects, and trembles at a janizary's frown. here is, indeed, a much greater appearance of subjection than amongst us; a minister of state is not spoke to, but upon the knee: should a reflection on his conduct be dropt (sic) in a coffee-house (for they have spies every where) the house would be raz'd (sic) to the ground, and perhaps the whole company put to the torture. no huzzaing mobs, senseless pamphlets, and tavern disputes about politics;
              a consequential ill that freedom draws;
              a bad effect,—but from a noble cause.
none of our harmless calling names! but when a minister here displeases the people, in three hours time he is dragged even from his master's arms. they cut off hands, head, and feet, and throw them before the palace gate, with all the respect in the world; while the sultan (to whom they all profess an unlimited adoration) sits trembling in his apartment, and dare neither defend nor revenge his favourite. this is the blessed condition of the most absolute monarch upon earth, who o—— no l—— but his will. [editor's note: two words are unreadable due to damage to the book which may have occurred at the time of printing. it seems probable that the sentence should end ".. who owns no limit but his will.".]
i cannot help wishing, in the loyality (sic) of my heart, that the parliament would send hither a ship-load of young passive obedient men, that they might see arbitrary government in its clearest, and strongest light, where 'tis hard to judge, whether the prince, people, or ministers, are most miserable. i could make many reflections on this subject; but i know, madam, your own good sense has already furnished you with better than i am capable of.
i went yesterday along with the french ambassadress to see the grand signior in his passage to the mosque. he was preceded by a numerous guard of janizaries, with vast white feathers on their heads, as also by the spahis and bostangees, (these are foot and horse guards) and the royal gardeners, which are a very considerable body of men, dressed in different habits of fine lively colours, so that at a distance, they appeared like a parterre of tulips. after them the aga of the janizaries, in a robe of purple velvet, lined with silver tissue, his horse led by two slaves richly dressed. next him the kyzlier-aga (your ladyship knows, this is the chief guardian of the seraglio ladies) in a deep yellow cloth (which suited very well to his black face) lined with sables. last came his sublimity himself, arrayed in green, lined with the fur of a black moscovite fox, which is supposed worth a thousand pounds sterling, and mounted on a fine horse, with furniture embroidered with jewels. six more horses richly caparisoned were led after him; and two of his principal courtiers bore, one his gold, and the other his silver coffee-pot, on a staff; another carried a silver stool on his head for him to sit on.—-it would be too tedious to tell your ladyship the various dresses and turbants (sic) by which their rank is distinguished; but they were all extremely rich and gay, to the number of some thousands; so that perhaps there cannot be seen a more beautiful procession. the sultan appeared to us a handsome man of about forty, with something, however, severe in his countenance, and his eyes very —— —— —— [editor's note: as above a few words are illegible but seem to be 'sultry and black'.] he happened to stop under the window where he stood, and (i suppose being told who we were) looked upon us very attentively, so that we had full leisure to consider him. the french ambassadress agreed with me as to his good mien; i see that lady very often; she is young, and her conversation would be a great relief to me, if i could persuade her to live without those forms and ceremonies that make life so formal and tiresome. but she is so delighted with her guards, her four and twenty footmen, gentlemen, ushers, &c. that she would rather die than make me a visit without them; not to reckon a coachful of attending damsels ycleap'd (sic) maids of honour. what vexes me is, that as long as she will visit me with a troublesome equipage, i am obliged to do the same: however, our mutual interest makes us much together. i went with her the other day all round the town, in an open gilt chariot, with our joint train of attendants, preceded by our guards, who might have summoned the people to see what they had never seen, nor ever perhaps would see again, two young christian ambassadresses at the same time. your ladyship may easily imagine, we drew a vast crowd of spectators, but all silent as death. if any of them had taken the liberties of our mobs upon any strange sight, our janizaries had made no scruple of falling on them with their scimitars, without danger for so doing, being above law. these people however (i mean the janizaries) have some good qualities; they are very zealous and faithful where they serve, and look upon it as their business to fight for you on all occasions. of this i had a very pleasant instance in a village on this side philippopolis, where we were met by our domestic guards. i happened to bespeak pigeons for supper, upon which one of my janizaries went immediately to the cadi (the chief civil officer of the town) and ordered him to send in some dozens. the poor man answered, that he had already sent about, but could get none. my janizary, in the height of his zeal for my service, immediately locked him up prisoner in his room, telling him he deserved death for his impudence, in offering to excuse his not obeying my command; but, out of respect to me, he would not punish him but by my order. accordingly he came very gravely to me, to ask what should be done to him; adding, by way of compliment, that if i pleased he would bring me his head.—this may give you some idea of the unlimited power of these fellows, who are all sworn brothers, and bound to revenge the injuries done to one another, whether at cairo, aleppo, or any part of the world. this inviolable league makes them so powerful, that the greatest man at court never speaks to them but in a flattering tone; and in asia, any man that is rich is forced to enrol himself a janizary, to secure his estate.—but i have already said enough; and i dare swear, dear madam, that, by this time, 'tis a very comfortable reflection to you, that there is no possibility of your receiving such a tedious letter but once in six months; 'tis that consideration has given me the assurance of entertaining you so long, and will, i hope, plead the excuse of, dear madam, your's, &c.
i wish to god, dear sister, that you were as regular in letting me know what passes on your side of the globe, as i am careful in endeavouring to amuse you by the account of all i see here, that i think worth your notice. you content yourself with telling me over and over, that the town is very dull: it may, possibly, be dull to you, when every day does not present you with something new; but for me that am in arrears, at least two months news, all that seems very stale with you, would be very fresh and sweet here. pray let me into more particulars, and i will try to awaken your gratitude, by giving you a full and true relation of the novelties of this place, none of which would surprise you more than a sight of my person, as i am now in my turkish habit, though i believe you would be of my opinion, that 'tis admirably becoming.—i intend to send you my picture; in the mean time accept of it here.
the first part of my dress is a pair of drawers, very full that reach to my shoes, and conceal the legs more modestly than your petticoats. they are of a thin rose-coloured damask, brocaded with silver flowers. my shoes are of white kid leather, embroidered with gold. over this hangs my smock, of a fine white silk gauze, edged with embroidery. this smock has wide sleeves hanging half way down the arm, and is closed at the neck with a diamond button; but the shape and colour of the bosom is very well to be distinguished through it.—the antery is a waistcoat, made close to the shape, of white and gold damask, with very long sleeves falling back, and fringed with deep gold fringe, and should have diamond or pearl buttons. my caftan, of the same stuff with my drawers, is a robe exactly fitted to my shape, and reaching to my feet, with very long strait falling sleeves. over this is my girdle, of about four fingers broad, which, all that can afford it, have entirely of diamonds or other precious stones; those who will not be at that expence, have it of exquisite embroidery on sattin (sic); but it must be fastened before with a clasp of diamonds.—the curdee is a loose robe they throw off, or put on, according to the weather, being of a rich brocade (mine is green and gold) either lined with ermine or sables; the sleeves reach very little below the shoulders. the head dress is composed of a cap, called talpock, which is, in winter, of fine velvet embroidered with pearls or diamonds, and in summer, of a light shining silver stuff. this is fixed on one side of the head, hanging a little way down with a gold tassel, and bound on, either with a circle of diamonds (as i have seen several) or a rich embroidered handkerchief. on the other side of the head, the hair is laid flat; and here the ladies are at liberty to shew their fancies; some putting flowers, others a plume of heron's feathers, and, in short, what they please; but the most general fashion is a large bouquet of jewels, made like natural flowers; that is, the buds, of pearl; the roses, of different coloured rubies: the jessamines, of diamonds; the jonquils, of topazes, &c. so well set and enamelled, 'tis hard to imagine any thing of that kind so beautiful. the hair hangs at its full length behind, divided into tresses braided with pearl or ribbon, which is always in great quantity. i never saw in my life so many fine heads of hair. in one lady's, i have counted a hundred and ten of the tresses, all natural; but it must be owned, that every kind of beauty is more common here than with us. 'tis surprising to see a young woman that is not very handsome. they have naturally the most beautiful complexion in the world, and generally large black eyes. i can assure you with great truth, that the court of england (though i believe it the fairest in christendom) does not contain so many beauties as are under our protection here. they generally shape their eye-brows, and both greeks and turks have the custom of putting round their eyes a black tincture, that, at a distance, or by candle-light, adds very much to the blackness of them. i fancy many of our ladies would be overjoyed to know this secret, but 'tis too visible by day. they dye their nails a rose colour; but, i own, i cannot enough accustom myself to this fashion, to find any beauty in it.
as to their morality or good conduct, i can say, like harlequin, that 'tis just as 'tis with you; and the turkish ladies don't commit one sin the less for not being christians. now, that i am a little acquainted with their ways, i cannot forbear admiring, either the exemplary discretion, or extreme stupidity of all the writers that have given accounts of them. 'tis very easy to see, they have in reality more liberty than we have. no woman, of what rank soever, is permitted to go into the streets without two murlins, one that covers her face all but her eyes, and another, that hides the whole dress of her head, and hangs half way down her back. their shapes are also wholely (sic) concealed, by a thing they call a serigee, which no woman of any sort appears without; this has strait sleeves, that reach to their fingers-ends, and it laps all round them, not unlike a riding-hood. in winter, 'tis of cloth; and in summer, of plain stuff or silk. you may guess then, how effectually this disguises them, so that there is no distinguishing the great lady from her slave. 'tis impossible for the most jealous husband to know his wife, when he meets her; and no man dare touch or follow a woman in the street.
this perpetual masquerade gives them entire liberty of following their inclinations, without danger of discovery. the most usual method of intrigue, is, to send an appointment to the lover to meet the lady at a jew's shop, which are as notoriously convenient as our indian-houses; and yet, even those who don't make use of them, do not scruple to go to buy pennyworths, and tumble over rich goods, which are chiefly to be found amongst that sort of people. the great ladies seldom let their gallants know who they are; and 'tis so difficult to find it out, that they can very seldom guess at her name, whom they have corresponded with for above half a year together. you may easily imagine the number of faithful wives very small in a country where they have nothing to fear from a lover's indiscretion, since we see so many have the courage to expose themselves to that in this world, and all the threatened punishment of the next, which is never preached to the turkish damsels. neither have they much to apprehend from the resentment of their husbands; those ladies that are rich, having all their money in their own hands. upon the whole, i look upon the turkish women, as the only free people in the empire; the very divan pays respect to them; and the grand signior himself, when a bassa is executed, never violates the privileges of the haram, (or womens apartment) which remains unsearched and entire to the widow. they are queens of their slaves, whom the husband has no permission so much as to look upon, except it be an old woman or two that his lady chuses. 'tis true, their law permits them four wives; but there is no instance of a man of quality that makes use of this liberty, or of a woman of rank that would suffer it. when a husband happens to be inconstant, (as those things will happen) he keeps his mistress in a house apart, and visits her as privately as he can, just as it is with you. amongst all the great men here, i only know the testerdar, (i.e. a treasurer) that keeps a number of she slaves, for his own use, (that is, on his own side of the house; for a slave once given to serve a lady, is entirely at her disposal) and he is spoke of as a libertine, or what we should call a rake, and his wife won't see him, though she continues to live in his house. thus you see, dear sister, the manners of mankind do not differ so widely, as our voyage-writers would make us believe. perhaps, it would be more entertaining to add a few surprising customs of my own invention; but nothing seems to me so agreeable as truth, and i believe nothing so acceptable to you. i conclude therefore with repeating the great truth of my being, dear sister, &c.
in my opinion, dear s. i ought rather to quarrel with you, for not answering my nimeguen letter of august, till december, than to excuse my not writing again till now. i am sure there is on my side a very good excuse for silence, having gone such tiresome land-journies (sic), though i don't find the conclusion of them so bad as you seem to imagine. i am very easy here, and not in the solitude you fancy me. the great number of greeks, french, english, and italians that are under our protection, make their court to me from morning till night; and, i'll assure you, are, many of them, very fine ladies; for there is no possibility for a christian to live easily under this government, but by the protection of an ambassador—and the richer they are, the greater is their danger.
those dreadful stories you have heard of the plague, have very little foundation in truth. i own, i have much ado to reconcile myself to the sound of a word, which has always given me such terrible ideas; though i am convinced there is little more in it, than in a fever. as a proof of this, let me tell you that we passed through two or three towns most violently infected. in the very next house where we lay, (in one of those places) two persons died of it. luckily for me i was so well deceived, that i knew nothing of the matter; and i was made believe, that our second cook had only a great cold. however, we left our doctor to take care of him, and yesterday they both arrived here in good health; and i am now let into the secret, that he has had the plague. there are many that escape it, neither is the air ever infected. i am persuaded, that it would be as easy a matter to root it out here, as out of italy and france; but it does so little mischief, they are not very solicitous about it, and are content to suffer this distemper, instead of our variety, which they are utterly unacquainted with.
a propos of distempers, i am going to tell you a thing that will make you wish yourself here. the small-pox, so fatal, and so general amongst us, is here entirely harmless, by the invention of ingrafting, which is the term they give it. there is a set of old women, who make it their business to perform the operation, every autumn, in the month of september, when the great heat is abated. people send to one another to know if any of their family has a mind to have the small-pox: they make parties for this purpose, and when they are met (commonly fifteen or sixteen together) the old woman comes with a nutshell full of the matter of the best sort of small-pox, and asks what vein you please to have opened. she immediately rips open that you offer to her, with a large needle, (which gives you no more pain than a common scratch) and puts into the vein as much matter as can ly upon the head of her needle, and after that, binds up the little wound with a hollow bit of shell; and in this manner opens four or five veins. the grecians have commonly the superstition of opening one in the middle of the forehead, one in each arm, and one on the breast, to mark the sign of the cross; but this has a very ill effect, all these wounds leaving little scars, and is not done by those that are not superstitious, who chuse to have them in the legs, or that part of the arm that is concealed. the children or young patients play together all the rest of the day, and are in perfect health to the eighth. then the fever begins to seize them, and they keep their beds two days, very seldom three. they have very rarely above twenty or thirty in their faces, which never mark; and in eight days time they are as well as before their illness. where they are wounded, there remain running sores during the distemper, which i don't doubt is a great relief to it. every year thousands undergo this operation; and the french ambassador says pleasantly, that they take the small-pox here by way of diversion, as they take the waters in other countries. there is no example of any one that has died in it; and you may believe i am well satisfied of the safety of this experiment, since i intend to try it on my dear little son. i am patriot enough to take pains to bring this useful invention into fashion in england; and i should not fail to write to some of our doctors very particularly about it, if i knew any one of them that i thought had virtue enough to destroy such a considerable branch of their revenue, for the good of mankind. but that distemper is too beneficial to them, not to expose to all their resentment the hardy wight (sic) that should undertake to put an end to it. perhaps, if i live to return, i may, however, have courage to war with them. upon this occasion, admire the heroism in the heart of your friend, &c. &c.
i can now tell dear mrs t——, that i am safely arrived at the end of my very long journey. i will not tire you with the account of the many fatigues i have suffered. you would rather be informed of the strange things that are to be seen here; and a letter out of turkey, that has nothing extraordinary in it, would be as great a disappointment, as my visitors will receive at london, if i return thither without any rarities to shew them.—what shall i tell you of?—you never saw camels in your life; and perhaps the description of them will appear new to you; i can assure you the first sight of them was so to me; and though i have seen hundreds of pictures of those animals, i never saw any that was resembling enough, to give a true idea of them. i am going to make a bold observation, and possibly a false one, because nobody has ever made it before me; but i do take them to be of the stag kind; their legs, bodies, and necks, are exactly shaped like them, and their colour very near the same. 'tis true they are much larger, being a great deal higher than a horse; and so swift, that, after the defeat of peterwaradin, they far outran the swiftest horses, and brought the first news of the loss of the battle to belgrade. they are never thoroughly tamed; the drivers take care to tie them one to another, with strong ropes, fifty in a string, led by an ass, on which the driver rides. i have seen three hundred in one caravan. they carry the third part more than any horse; but 'tis a particular art to load them, because of the bunch on their backs. they seem to be very ugly creatures, their heads being ill-formed and disproportioned (sic) to their bodies. they carry all the burdens; and the beasts destined to the plough, are buffaloes, an animal you are also unacquainted with. they are larger and more clumsy than an ox; they have short thick black horns close to their heads, which grow turning backwards. they say this horn looks very beautiful when 'tis well polished. they are all black, with very short hair on their hides, and have extremely little white eyes, that make them look like devils. the country people dye their tails, and the hair of their forehead, red, by way of ornament. horses are not put here to any laborious work, nor are they at all fit for it. they are beautiful and full of spirit, but generally little, and not strong, as the breed of colder countries; very gentle, however, with all their vivacity, and also swift and surefooted. i have a little white favourite, that i would not part with on any terms; he prances under me with so much fire, you would think that i had a great deal of courage to dare to mount him; yet i'll assure you, i never rid a horse so much at my command in my life. my side-saddle is the first that was ever seen in this part of the world, and is gazed at with as much wonder as the ship of columbus in the first discovery of america. here are some little birds, held in a sort of religious reverence, and, for that reason, multiply prodigiously: turtles, on the account of their innocence; and storks, because they are supposed to make every winter the pilgrimage to mecca. to say truth, they are the happiest subjects under the turkish government, and are so sensible of their privileges, that they walk the streets without fear, and generally build in the low parts of houses. happy are those whose houses are so distinguished, as the vulgar turks are perfectly persuaded that they will not be, that year, attacked either by fire or pestilence. i have the happiness of one of their sacred nests under my chamber-window.
now i am talking of my chamber, i remember the description of the houses here will be as new to you, as any of the birds or beasts. i suppose you have read, in most of our accounts of turkey, that their houses are the most miserable pieces of building in the world. i can speak very learnedly on that subject, having been in so many of them; and, i assure you, 'tis no such thing. we are now lodged in a palace belonging to the grand signior. i really think the manner of building here very agreeable, and proper for the country. 'tis true, they are not at all solicitous to beautify the outsides of their houses, and they are generally built of wood; which, i own, is the cause of many inconveniencies; but this is not to be charged on the ill taste of the people, but on the oppression of the government. every house, at the death of its master, is at the grand signior's disposal; and therefore, no man cares to make a great expence, which he is not sure his family will be the better for. all their design is to build a house commodious, and that will last their lives; and they are very indifferent if it falls down the year after. every house, great and small, is divided into two distinct parts, which only join together by a narrow passage. the first house has a large court before it, and open galleries all round it, which is to me a thing very agreeable. this gallery leads to all the chambers, which are commonly large, and with two rows of windows, the first being of painted glass; they seldom build above two stories, each of which has galleries. the stairs are broad, and not often above thirty steps. this is the house belonging to the lord, and the adjoining one is called the haram, that is, the ladies apartment, (for the name of seraglio is peculiar to the grand signior;) it has also a gallery running round it towards the garden, to which all the windows are turned, and the same number of chambers as the other, but more gay and splendid, both in painting and furniture. the second row of windows is very low, with grates like those of convents; the rooms are all spread with persian carpets, and raised at one end of them (my chambers are raised at both ends) about two feet. this is the sofa, which is laid with a richer sort of carpet, and all round it a sort of couch, raised half a foot, covered with rich silk, according to the fancy or magnificence of the owner. mine is of scarlet cloth, with a gold fringe; round about this are placed, standing against the wall, two rows of cushions, the first very large, and the next, little ones; and here the turks display their greatest magnificence. they are generally brocade, or embroidery of gold wire upon white sattin.—nothing can look more gay and splendid. these seats are also so convenient and easy, that i believe i shall never endure chairs as long as i live.—the rooms are low, which i think no fault, and the ceiling is always of wood, generally inlaid or painted with flowers. they open in many places, with folding doors, and serve for cabinets, i think, more conveniently than ours. between the windows are little arches to set pots of perfume, or baskets of flowers. but what pleases me best, is the fashion of having marble fountains in the lower part of the room, which throw up several spouts of water, giving, at the same time, an agreeable coolness, and a pleasant dashing sound, falling from one basin to another. some of these are very magnificent. each house has a bagnio, which consists generally in two or three little rooms, leaded on the top, paved with marble, with basins, cocks of water, and all conveniencies for either hot or cold baths.
you will perhaps be surprised at an account so different from what you have been entertained with by the common voyage-writers, who are very fond of speaking of what they don't know. it must be under a very particular character, or on some extraordinary occasion, that a christian is admitted into the house of a man of quality; and their harams are always forbidden ground. thus they can only speak of the outside, which makes no great appearance; and the womens apartments are always built backward, removed from sight, and have no other prospect than the gardens, which are inclosed with very high walls. there are none of our parterres in them; but they are planted with high trees, which give an agreeable shade, and, to my fancy, a pleasing view. in the midst of the garden is the chiosk, that is, a large room, commonly beautified with a fine fountain in the midst of it. it is raised nine or ten steps, and inclosed with gilded lattices, round which, vines, jessamines, and honey-suckles, make a sort of green wall. large trees are planted round this place, which is the scene of their greatest pleasures, and where the ladies spend most of their hours, employed by their music or embroidery.—in the public gardens, there are public chiosks where people go, that are not so well accommodated at home, and drink their coffee, sherbet, &c.—neither are they ignorant of a more durable manner of building: their mosques are all of free-stone, and the public hanns, or inns, extremely magnificent, many of them taking up a large square, built round with shops under stone arches, where poor artificers are lodged gratis. they have always a mosque joining to them, and the body of the hann is a most noble hall, capable of holding three or four hundred persons, the court extremely spacious, and cloisters round it, that give it the air of our colleges. i own, i think it a more reasonable piece of charity than the founding of convents.—i think i have now told you a great deal for once. if you don't like my choice of subjects, tell me what you would have me write upon; there is nobody more desirous to entertain you, than, dear mrs t——, your's, &c. &c.
i wrote to you, dear sister, and to all my other english correspondents, by the last ship, and only heaven can tell, when i shall have another opportunity of sending to you; but i cannot forbear to write again, though perhaps my letter may ly upon my hands this two months. to confess the truth, my head is so full of my entertainment yesterday, that 'tis absolutely necessary, for my own repose, to give it some vent. without farther preface, i will then begin my story.
i was invited to dine with the grand vizier's lady, and it was with a great deal of pleasure i prepared myself for an entertainment, which was never before given to any christian. i thought i should very little satisfy her curiosity, (which i did not doubt was a considerable motive to the invitation) by going in a dress she was used to see, and therefore dressed myself in the court habit of vienna, which is much more magnificent than ours. however, i chose to go incognito, to avoid any disputes about ceremony, and went in a turkish coach, only attended by my woman, that held up my train, and the greek lady, who was my interpretess. i was met at the court door by her black eunuch, who helped me out of the coach with great respect, and conducted me through several rooms, where her she-slaves, finely dressed, were ranged on each side. in the innermost, i found the lady sitting on her sofa, in a sable vest. she advanced to meet me, and presented me half a dozen of her friends, with great civility. she seemed a very good woman, near fifty years old. i was surprised to observe so little magnificence in her house, the furniture being all very moderate; and, except the habits and number of her slaves, nothing about her appeared expensive. she guessed at my thoughts, and told me she was no longer of an age to spend either her time or money in superfluities; that her whole expence was in charity, and her whole employment praying to god. there was no affectation in this speech; both she and her husband are entirely given up to devotion. he never looks upon any other woman; and, what is much more extraordinary, touches no bribes, notwithstanding the example of all his predecessors. he is so scrupulous on this point, he would not accept mr w——'s present, till he had been assured over and over, that it was a settled perquisite of his place, at the entrance of every ambassador. she entertained me with all kind of civility, till dinner came in, which was served, one dish at a time, to a vast number, all finely dressed after their manner, which i don't think so bad as you have perhaps heard it represented. i am a very good judge of their eating, having lived three weeks in the house of an effendi at belgrade, who gave us very magnificent dinners, dressed by his own cooks. the first week they pleased me extremely; but, i own, i then began to grow weary of their table, and desired our own cook might add a dish or two after our manner. but i attribute this to custom, and am very much inclined to believe, that an indian, who had never tasted of either, would prefer their cookery to ours. their sauces are very high, all the roast very much done. they use a great deal of very rich spice. the soup is served for the last dish; and they have, at least, as great a variety of ragouts as we have. i was very sorry i could not eat of as many as the good lady would have had me, who was very earnest in serving me of every thing. the treat concluded with coffee and perfumes, which is a high mark of respect; two slaves kneeling censed my hair, clothes, and handkerchief. after this ceremony, she commanded her slaves to play and dance, which they did with their guitars in their hands, and she excused to me their want of skill, saying she took no care to accomplish them in that art.
i returned her thanks, and, soon after, took my leave. i was conducted back in the same manner i entered, and would have gone straight to my own house; but the greek lady with me, earnestly solicited me to visit the kahya's lady, saying, he was the second officer in the empire, and ought indeed to be looked upon as the first, the grand vizier having only the name, while he exercised the authority. i had found so little diversion in the vizier's haram, that i had no mind to go into another. but her importunity prevailed with me, and i am extremely glad i was so complaisant. all things here were with quite another air than at the grand vizier's; and the very house confessed the difference between an old devotee, and a young beauty. it was nicely clean and magnificent. i was met at the door by two black eunuchs, who led me through a long gallery, between two ranks of beautiful young girls, with their hair finely plaited, almost hanging to their feet, all dressed in fine light damasks, brocaded with silver. i was sorry that decency did not permit me to stop to consider them nearer. but that thought was lost upon my entrance into a large room, or rather pavilion, built round with gilded sashes, which were most of them thrown up, and the trees planted near them gave an agreeable shade, which hindered the sun from being troublesome. the jessamines and honey-suckles that twisted round their trunks, shed a soft perfume, increased by a white marble fountain playing sweet water in the lower part of the room, which fell into three or four basins, with a pleasing sound. the roof was painted with all sorts of flowers, falling out of gilded baskets, that seemed tumbling down. on a sofa, raised three steps, and covered with fine persian carpets, sat the kahya's lady, leaning on cushions of white sattin, embroidered; and at her feet sat two young girls about twelve years old, lovely as angels, dressed perfectly rich, and almost covered with jewels. but they were hardly seen near the fair fatima, (for that is her name) so much her beauty effaced every thing i have seen, nay, all that has been called lovely either in england or germany. i must own, that i never saw any thing so gloriously beautiful, nor can i recollect a face that would have been taken notice of near hers. she stood up to receive me, saluting me after their fashion, putting her hand to her heart with a sweetness full of majesty, that no court breeding could ever give. she ordered cushions to be given me, and took care to place me in the corner, which is the place of honour. i confess, though the greek lady had before given me a great opinion of her beauty, i was so struck with admiration, that i could not, for some time, speak to her, being wholly taken up in gazing. that surprising harmony of features! that charming result of the whole! that exact proportion of body! that lovely bloom of complexion unsullied by art! the unutterable enchantment of her smile!—but her eyes!—large and black, with all the soft languishment of the blue! every turn of her face discovering some new grace.
after my first surprise was over, i endeavoured, by nicely examining her face, to find out some imperfection, without any fruit of my search, but my being clearly convinced of the error of that vulgar notion, that a face exactly proportioned, and perfectly beautiful, would not be agreeable; nature having done for her, with more success, what appelles is said to have essayed, by a collection of the most exact features, to form a perfect face. add to all this, a behaviour so full of grace and sweetness, such easy motions, with an air so majestic, yet free from stiffness or affectation, that i am persuaded, could she be suddenly transported upon the most polite throne of europe, no body would think her other than born and bred to be a queen, though educated in a country we call barbarous. to say all in a word, our most celebrated english beauties would vanish near her.
she was dressed in a caftan of gold brocade, flowered with silver, very well fitted to her shape, and shewing to admiration the beauty of her bosom, only shaded by the thin gauze of her shift. her drawers were pale pink, her waistcoat green and silver, her slippers white sattin, finely embroidered: her lovely arms adorned with bracelets of diamonds, and her broad girdle set round with diamonds; upon her head a rich turkish handkerchief of pink and silver, her own fine black hair hanging a great length, in various tresses, and on one side of her head some bodkins of jewels. i am afraid you will accuse me of extravagance in this description. i think i have read somewhere, that women always speak in rapture when they speak of beauty, and i cannot imagine why they should not be allowed to do so. i rather think it a virtue to be able to admire without any mixture of desire or envy. the gravest writers have spoken with great warmth, of some celebrated pictures and statues. the workmanship of heaven, certainly excels all our weak imitations, and, i think, has a much better claim to our praise. for my part, i am not ashamed to own, i took more pleasure in looking on the beauteous fatima, than the finest piece of sculpture could have given me. she told me, the two girls at her feet were her daughters, though she appeared too young to be their mother. her fair maids were ranged below the sofa, to the number of twenty, and put me in mind of the pictures of the ancient nymphs. i did not think all nature could have furnished such a scene of beauty. she made them a sign to play and dance. four of them immediately began to play some soft airs on instruments, between a lute and a guitar, which they accompanied with their voices, while the others danced by turns. this dance was very different from what i had seen before. nothing could be more artful, or more proper to raise certain ideas. the tunes so soft!—the motions so languishing!—accompanied with pauses and dying eyes! half-falling back, and then recovering themselves in so artful a manner, that i am very positive, the coldest and most rigid pride upon earth, could not have looked upon them without thinking of something not to be spoke of.—i suppose you may have read that the turks have no music, but what is shocking to the ears; but this account is from those who never heard any but what is played in the streets, and is just as reasonable, as if a foreigner should take his ideas of english music, from the bladder and string, or the marrow-bones and cleavers. i can assure you that the music is extremely pathetic; 'tis true, i am inclined to prefer the italian, but perhaps i am partial. i am acquainted with a greek lady who sings better than mrs robinson, and is very well skilled in both, who gives the preference to the turkish. 'tis certain they have very fine natural voices; these were very agreeable. when the dance was over, four fair slaves came into the room, with silver censers in their hands, and perfumed the air with amber, aloes-wood, and other scents. after this, they served me coffee upon their knees, in the finest japan china, with soucoups of silver, gilt. the lovely fatima entertained me, all this while, in the most polite agreeable manner, calling me often uzelle sultanam, or the beautiful sultana; and desiring my friendship with the best grace in the world, lamenting that she could not entertain me in my own language.
when i took my leave, two maids brought in a fine silver basket of embroidered handkerchiefs; she begged i would wear the richest for her sake, and gave the others to my woman and interpretess.—i retired through the same ceremonies as before, and could not help thinking, i had been some time in mahomet's paradise; so much was i charmed with what i had seen. i know not how the relation of it appears to you. i wish it may give you part of my pleasure; for i would have my dear sister share in all the diversions of, yours,&c.
i heartily beg your ladyship's pardon; but i really could not forbear laughing heartily at your letter, and the commissions you are pleased to honour me with. you desire me to buy you a greek slave, who is to be mistress of a thousand good qualities. the greeks are subjects, and not slaves. those who are to be bought in that manner, are either such as are taken in war, or stolen by the tartars from russia, circassia, or georgia, and are such miserable, awkward, poor wretches, you would not think any of them worthy to be your house-maids. 'tis true, that many thousands were taken in the morea; but they have been, most of them, redeemed by the charitable contributions of the christians, or ransomed by their own relations at venice. the fine slaves that wait upon the great ladies, or serve the pleasures of the great men, are all bought at the age of eight or nine years old, and educated with great care, to accomplish them in singing, dancing, embroidery, &c. they are commonly circassians, and their patron never sells them, except it is as a punishment for some very great fault. if ever they grow weary of them, they either present them to a friend, or give them their freedom. those that are exposed to sale at the markets, are always either guilty of some crime, or so entirely worthless, that they are of no use at all. i am afraid you will doubt the truth of this account, which, i own, is very different from our common notions in england; but it is no less truth for all that.—your whole letter is full of mistakes, from one end to the other. i see you have taken your ideas of turkey, from that worthy author dumont, who has wrote with equal ignorance and confidence. 'tis a particular pleasure to me here, to read the voyages to the levant, which are generally so far removed from truth, and so full of absurdities, i am very well diverted with them. they never fail giving you an account of the women, whom, 'tis certain, they never saw, and talking very wisely of the genius of the men, into whose company they are never admitted; and very often describe mosques, which they dare not even peep into. the turks are very proud, and will not converse with a stranger they are not assured is considerable in his own country. i speak of the men of distinction; for, as to the ordinary fellows, you may imagine what ideas their conversation can give of the general genius of the people.
as to the balm of mecca, i will certainly send you some; but it is not so easily got as you suppose it, and i cannot, in conscience, advise you to make use of it. i know not how it comes to have such universal applause. all the ladies of my acquaintance at london and vienna, have begged me to send pots of it to them. i have had a present of a small quantity (which, i'll assure you, is very valuable) of the best sort, and with great joy applied it to my face, expecting some wonderful effect to my advantage. the next morning, the change indeed was wonderful; my face was swelled to a very extraordinary size, and all over as red as my lady h——'s. it remained in this lamentable state three days, during which, you may be sure, i passed my time very ill. i believed it would never be otherways (sic); and to add to my mortification, mr w——y reproached my indiscretion, without ceasing. however, my face is since in statu quo; nay, i am told by the ladies here, that it is much mended by the operation, which, i confess, i cannot perceive in my looking-glass. indeed, if one was to form an opinion of this balm from their faces, one should think very well of it. they all make use of it, and have the loveliest bloom in the world. for my part, i never intend to endure the pain of it again; let my complexion take its natural course, and decay in its own due time. i have very little esteem for medicines of this nature, but do as you please, madam; only remember, before you use it, that your face will not be such as you will care to shew in the drawing-room for some days after. if one was to believe the women in this country, there is a surer way of making one's self beloved, than by becoming handsome; though, you know that's our method. but they pretend to the knowledge of secrets, that, by way of inchantment (sic), give them the entire empire over whom they please. for me, who am not very apt to believe in wonders, i cannot find faith for this. i disputed the point last night with a lady, who really talks very sensibly on any other subject; but she was downright angry with me, in that she did not perceive, she had persuaded me of the truth of forty stories she told me of this kind; and, at last, mentioned several ridiculous marriages, that there could be no other reason assigned for. i assured her, that, in england, where we were entirely ignorant of all magic, where the climate is not half so warm, nor the women half so handsome, we were not without our ridiculous marriages; and that we did not look upon it as any thing supernatural, when a man played the fool, for the sake of a woman. but my arguments could not convince her against (as she said) her certain knowledge. to this she added, that she scrupled making use of charms herself; but that she could do it whenever she pleased; and, staring me in the face, said, (with a very learned air) that no enchantments would have their effects upon me; and that there were some people exempt from their power, but very few. you may imagine how i laughed at this discourse; but all the women are of the same opinion. they don't pretend to any commerce with the devil; but only that there are certain compositions adapted to inspire love. if one could send over a ship-load of them, i fancy it would be a very quick way of raising an estate. what would not some ladies of our acquaintance give for such merchandize? adieu, my dear lady ——. i cannot conclude my letter with a subject that affords more delightful scenes to the imagination. i leave you to figure to yourself the extreme court that will be made to me, at my return, if my travels should furnish me with such a useful piece of learning. i am, dear madam, yours, &c. &c.
i am infinitely obliged to you, dear mrs t—— for your entertaining letter. you are the only one of my correspondents that have judged right enough, to think i would gladly be informed of the news amongst you. all the rest of them tell me, (almost in the same words) that they suppose i know every thing. why they are pleased to suppose in this manner, i can guess no reason, except they are persuaded, that the breed of mahomet's pigeon still subsists in this country, and that i receive supernatural intelligence. i wish i could return your goodness with some diverting accounts from hence. but i know not what part of the scenes here would gratify your curiosity, or whether you have any curiosity at all for things so far distant. to say the truth, i am at this present writing, not very much turned for the recollection of what is diverting, my head being wholly filled with the preparations necessary for the increase of my family, which i expect every day. you may easily guess at my uneasy situation. but i am, however, comforted in some degree, by the glory that accrues to me from it, and a reflection on the contempt i should otherwise fall under. you won't know what to make of this speech; but, in this country, 'tis more despicable to be married and not fruitful, than 'tis with us to be fruitful before marriage. they have a notion, that whenever a woman leaves off bringing forth children, 'tis because she is too old for that business, whatever her face says to the contrary. this opinion makes the ladies here so ready to make proofs of their youth, (which is as necessary, in order to be a received beauty, as it is to shew the proofs of nobility, to be admitted knights of malta) that they do not content themselves with using the natural means, but fly to all sorts of quackeries, to avoid the scandal of being past childbearing, and often kill themselves by them. without any exaggeration, all the women of my acquaintance have twelve or thirteen children; and the old ones boast of having had five and twenty, or thirty a-piece, and are respected according to the number they have produced.—when they are with child, 'tis their common expression to say, they hope god will be so merciful as to send them two this time; and when i have asked them sometimes, how they expected to provide for such a flock as they desire? they answered, that the plague will certainly kill half of them; which, indeed, generally happens, without much concern to the parents, who are satisfied with the vanity of having brought forth so plentifully. the french ambassadress is forced to comply with this fashion as well as myself. she has not been here much above a year, and has lain in once, and is big again. what is most wonderful, is, the exemption they seem to enjoy from the curse entailed on the sex. they see all company on the day of their delivery, and, at the fortnight's end, return visits, set out in their jewels and new clothes. i wish i may find the influence of the climate in this particular. but i fear i shall continue an english woman in that affair, as well as i do in my dread of fire and plague, which are two things very little feared here. most families have had their houses burnt down once or twice, occasioned by their extraordinary way of warming themselves, which is neither by chimnies (sic) nor stoves, but by a certain machine called a tendour, the height of two feet, in the form of a table, covered with a fine carpet or embroidery. this is made only of wood, and they put into it a small quantity of hot ashes, and sit with their legs under the carpet. at this table they work, read and very often, sleep; and, if they chance to dream, kick down the tendour, and the hot ashes commonly set the house on fire. there were five hundred houses burnt in this manner about a fortnight ago, and i have seen several of the owners since, who seem not at all moved at so common a misfortune. they put their goods into a bark, and see their houses burn with great philosophy, their persons being very seldom endangered, having no stairs to descend.
but, having entertained you with things i don't like, 'tis but just i should tell you something that pleases me. the climate is delightful in the extremest degree. i am now sitting, this present fourth of january, with the windows open, enjoying the warm shine of the sun, while you are freezing over a sad sea-coal fire; and my chamber is set out with carnations, roses, and jonquils, fresh from my garden. i am also charmed with many points of the turkish law, to our shame be it spoken, better designed, and better executed than ours; particularly, the punishment of convicted liars (triumphant criminals in our country, god knows). they are burnt in the forehead with a hot iron, when they are proved the authors of any notorious falsehoods. how many white foreheads should we see disfigured! how many fine gentlemen would be forced to wear their wigs as low as their eye-brows, were this law in practice with us! i should go on to tell you many other parts of justice, but i must send for my midwife.
i have not written to you, dear sister, these many months—a great piece of self-denial. but i know not where to direct, or what part of the world you are in. i have received no letter from you since that short note of april last, in which you tell me, that you are on the point of leaving england, and promise me a direction for the place you stay in; but i have, in vain, expected it till now; and now i only learn from the gazette, that you are returned, which induces me to venture this letter to your house at london. i had rather ten of my letters should be lost, than you imagine i don't write; and i think it is hard fortune, if one in ten don't reach you. however, i am resolved to keep the copies, as testimonies of my inclination, to give you, to the utmost of my power, all the diverting part of my travels, while you are exempt from all the fatigues and inconveniences.
in the first place, then, i wish you joy of your niece; for i was brought to bed of a daughter [footnote: the present countess of bute] five weeks ago. i don't mention this as one of my diverting adventures; though i must own, that it is not half so mortifying here as in england; there being as much difference, as there is between a little cold in the head, which sometimes happens here, and the consumption cough, so common in london. no body keeps their house a month for lying in; and i am not so fond of any of our customs, as to retain them when they are not necessary. i returned my visits at three weeks end; and, about four days ago, crossed the sea, which divides this place from constantinople, to make a new one, where i had the good fortune to pick up many curiosities. i went to see the sultana: hafiten, favourite of the late emperor mustapha, who, you know, (or perhaps you don't know) was deposed by his brother, the reigning sultan, and died a few weeks after, being poisoned, as it was generally believed. this lady was, immediately after his death, saluted with an absolute order to leave the seraglio, and chuse herself a husband among the great men at the porte. i suppose you may imagine her overjoyed at this proposal.—quite the contrary.—these women, who are called, and esteem themselves queens, look upon this liberty as the greatest disgrace and affront that can happen to them. she threw herself at the sultan's feet, and begged him to poniard (sic) her, rather than use his brother's widow with that contempt. she represented to him, in agonies of sorrow, that she was privileged from this misfortune, by having brought five princes into the ottoman family; but all the boys being dead, and only one girl surviving, this excuse was not received, and she was compelled to make her choice. she chose bekir effendi, then secretary of state, and above four score years old, to convince the world, that she firmly intended to keep the vow she had made, of never suffering a second husband to approach her bed; and since she must honour some subject so far, as to be called his wife, she would chuse him as a mark of her gratitude, since it was he that had presented her, at the age of ten years, to, her last lord. but she never permitted him to pay her one visit; though it is now fifteen years she has been in his house, where she passes her time in uninterrupted mourning, with a constancy very little known in christendom, especially in a widow of one and twenty, for she is now but thirty-six. she has no black eunuchs for her guard, her husband being obliged to respect her as a queen, and not to inquire at all into what is done in her apartment.
i was led into a large room, with a sofa the whole length of it, adorned with white marble pillars like a ruelle, covered with pale blue figured velvet, on a silver ground, with cushions of the same, where i was desired to repose, till the sultana appeared, who had contrived this manner of reception, to avoid rising up at my entrance, though she made me an inclination of her head, when i rose up to her. i was very glad to observe a lady that had been distinguished by the favour of an emperor, to whom beauties were, every day, presented from all parts of the world. but she did not seem to me, to have ever been half so beautiful as the fair fatima i saw at adrianople; though she had the remains of a fine face, more decayed by sorrow than time. but her dress was something so surprisingly rich, that i cannot forbear describing it to you. she wore a vest called dualma, which differs from a caftan by longer sleeves, and folding over at the bottom. it was of purple cloth, strait to her shape, and thick set, on each side, down to her feet, and round the sleeves, with pearls of the best water, of the same size as their buttons commonly are. you must not suppose, that i mean as large as those of my lord ——, but about the bigness of a pea; and to these buttons large loops of diamonds, in the form of those gold loops, so common on birth-day coats. this habit was tied, at the waist, with two large tassels of smaller pearls, and round the arms embroidered with large diamonds. her shift was fastened at the bottom with a great diamond, shaped like a lozenge; her girdle as broad as the broadest english ribband, entirely covered with diamonds. round her neck she wore three chains, which reached to her knees; one of large pearl, at the bottom of which hung a fine coloured emerald, as big as a turkey-egg; another, consisting of two hundred emeralds, close joined together, of the most lively green, perfectly matched, every one as large as a half-crown piece, and as thick as three crown pieces, and another of small emeralds, perfectly round. but her ear-rings eclipsed all the rest. they were two diamonds, shaped exactly like pears, as large as a big hazle-nut (sic). round her talpoche she had four strings of pearl—the whitest and most perfect in the world, at least enough to make four necklaces, every one as large as the duchess of marlborough's, and of the same shape, fastened with two roses, consisting of a large ruby for the middle stone, and round them twenty drops of clean diamonds to each. besides this, her head-dress was covered with bodkins of emeralds and diamonds. she wore large diamond bracelets, and had five rings on her fingers (except mr pitt's) the largest i ever saw in my life. 'tis for jewellers to compute the value of these things; but, according to the common estimation of jewels, in our part of the world, her whole dress must be worth a hundred thousand pounds sterling. this i am sure of, that no european queen has half the quantity; and the empress's jewels, though very fine would look very mean near her's. she gave me a dinner of fifty dishes of meat, which (after their fashion) were placed on the table but one at a time, and was extremely tedious. but the magnificence of her table answered very well to that of her dress. the knives were of gold, and the hafts set with diamonds. but the piece of luxury which grieved my eyes, was the table-cloth and napkins, which were all tiffany, embroidered with silk and gold, in the finest manner, in natural flowers. it was with the utmost regret that i made use of these costly napkins, which were as finely wrought as the finest handkerchiefs that ever came out of this country. you may be sure, that they were entirely spoiled before dinner was over. the sherbet (which is the liquor they drink at meals) was served in china bowls; but the covers and salvers massy gold. after dinner, water was brought in gold basons, and towels of the same kind with the napkins, which i very unwillingly wiped my hands upon, and coffee was served in china, with gold soucoups [footnote: saucers.]
the sultana seemed in a very good humour, and talked to me with the utmost civility. i did not omit this opportunity of learning all that i possibly could of the seraglio, which is so entirely unknown amongst us. she assured me, that the story of the sultan's throwing a handkerchief, is altogether fabulous; and the manner, upon that occasion, no other than this: he sends the kyslir aga, to signify to the lady the honour he intends her. she is immediately complimented upon it, by the others, and led to the bath, where she is perfumed and dressed in the most magnificent and becoming manner. the emperor precedes his visit by a royal present, and then comes into her apartment: neither is there any such thing as her creeping in at the bed's foot. she said, that the first he made choice of was always after the first in rank, and not the mother of the eldest son, as other writers would make us believe. sometimes the sultan diverts himself in the company of all his ladies, who stand in a circle round him. and she confessed, they were ready to die with envy and jealousy of the happy she that he distinguished by any appearance of preference. but this seemed to me neither better nor worse than the circles in most courts, where the glance of the monarch is watched, and every smile is waited for with impatience, and envied by those who cannot obtain it.
she never mentioned the sultan without tears in her eyes, yet she seemed very fond of the discourse. "my past happiness, said she, "appears a dream to me. yet i cannot forget, that i was beloved by "the greatest and most lovely of mankind. i was chosen from all the "rest, to make all his campaigns with him; and i would not survive "him, if i was not passionately fond of the princess my daughter. "yet all my tenderness for her was hardly enough to make me preserve "my life. when i left him, i passed a whole twelvemonth without "seeing the light. time has softened my despair; yet i now pass some "days every week in tears, devoted to the memory of my sultan." there was no affectation in these words. it was easy to see she was in a deep melancholy, though her good humour made her willing to divert me.
she asked me to walk in her garden, and one of her slaves immediately brought her a pellice of rich brocade lined with sables. i waited on her into the garden, which had nothing in it remarkable but the fountains; and from thence she shewed me all her apartments. in her bed-chamber, her toilet was displayed, consisting of two looking-glasses, the frames covered with pearls, and her night talpoche set with bodkins of jewels, and near it three vests of fine sables, every one of which is, at least, worth a thousand dollars, (two hundred pounds english money.) i don't doubt but these rich habits were purposely placed in sight, though they seemed negligently thrown on the sofa. when i took my leave of her, i was complimented with perfumes, as at the grand vizier's, and presented with a very fine embroidered handkerchief. her slaves were to the number of thirty, besides ten little ones, the eldest not above seven years old. these were the most beautiful girls i ever saw, all richly dressed; and i observed that the sultana took a great deal of pleasure in these lovely children, which is a vast expence; for there is not a handsome girl of that age to be bought under a hundred pounds sterling. they wore little garlands of flowers, and their own hair, braided, which was all their head-dress; but their habits were all of gold stuffs. these served her coffee kneeling; brought water when she washed, &c.—'tis a great part of the work of the older slaves to take care of these young girls, to learn them to embroider, and to serve them as carefully as if they were children of the family. now, do you imagine i have entertained you, all this while, with a relation that has, at least, received many embellishments from my hand? this, you will say, is but too like the arabian tales.—these embroidered napkins! and a jewel as large as a turkey's egg!—you forget, dear sister, those very tales were written by an author of this country, and (excepting the enchantments) are a real representation of the manners here. we travellers are in very hard circumstances: if we say nothing but what has been said before us, we are dull, and we have observed nothing. if we tell any thing new, we are laughed at as fabulous and romantic, not allowing either for the difference of ranks, which affords difference of company, or more curiosity, or the change of customs, that happen every twenty years in every country. but the truth is, people judge of travellers, exactly with the same candour, good nature, and impartiality, they judge of their neighbours upon all occasions. for my part, if i live to return amongst you, i am so well acquainted with the morals of all my dear friends and acquaintances, that i am resolved to tell them nothing at all, to avoid the imputation (which their charity would certainly incline them to) of my telling too much. but i depend upon your knowing me enough, to believe whatever i seriously assert for truth; though i give you leave to be surprised at an account so new to you. but what would you say if i told you, that i have been in a haram, where the winter apartment was wainscoted (sic) with inlaid work of mother of pearl, ivory of different colours, and olive wood, exactly like the little boxes you have seen brought out of this country; and in whose rooms designed for summer, the walls are all crusted with japan china, the roofs gilt, and the floors spread with the finest persian carpets? yet there is nothing more true; such is the palace of my lovely friend, the fair fatima, whom i was acquainted with at adrianople. i went to visit her yesterday; and, if possible, she appeared to me handsomer than before. she met me at the door of her chamber, and, giving me her hand with the best grace in the world; you christian ladies (said she, with a smile that made her as beautiful as an angel) have the reputation of inconstancy, and i did not expect, whatever goodness you expressed for me at adrianople, that i should ever see you again. but i am now convinced that i have really the happiness of pleasing you; and, if you knew how i speak of you amongst our ladies, you would be assured, that you do me justice in making me your friend. she placed me in the corner of the sofa, and i spent the afternoon in her conversation, with the greatest pleasure in the world.—the sultana hafiten is, what one would naturally expect to find a turkish lady, willing to oblige, but not knowing how to go about it; and 'tis easy to see, in her manner, that she has lived excluded from the world. but fatima has all the politeness and good breeding of a court, with an air that inspires, at once, respect and tenderness; and now, that i understand her language, i find her wit as agreeable as her beauty. she is very carious after the manners of other countries, and has not the partiality for her own, so common in little minds. a greek that i carried with me, who had never seen her before, (nor could have been admitted now, if she had not been in my train,) shewed that surprise at her beauty and manners, which is unavoidable at the first sight, and said to me in italian,—this is no turkish lady, she is certainly some christian.—fatima guessed she spoke of her, and asked what she said. i would not have told her, thinking she would have been no better pleased with the compliment, than one of our court beauties to be told she had the air of a turk; but the greek lady told it to her; and she smiled, saying, it is not the first time i have heard so: my mother was a poloneze, taken at the siege of caminiec; and my father used to rally me, saying, he believed his christian wife had found some gallant; for that i had not the air of a turkish girl.—i assured her, that if all the turkish ladies were like her, it was absolute necessary to confine them from public view, for the repose of mankind; and proceeded to tell her, what a noise such a face as hers would make in london or paris. i can't believe you, replied she agreeably; if beauty was so much valued in your country, as you say, they would never have suffered you to leave it.—perhaps, dear sister, you laugh at my vanity in repeating this compliment; but i only do it, as i think it very well turned, and give it you as an instance of the spirit of her conversation. her house was magnificently furnished, and very well fancied; her winter rooms being furnished with figured velvet, on gold grounds, and those for summer, with fine indian quilting embroidered with gold. the houses of the great turkish ladies are kept clean with as much nicety as those in holland. this was situated in a high part of the town; and from the window of her summer apartment, we had the prospect of the sea, the islands, and the asian mountains.—my letter is insensibly grown so long, i am ashamed of it. this is a very bad symptom. 'tis well if i don't degenerate into a downright story-teller. it may be, our proverb, that knowledge is no burden, may be true, as to one's self but knowing too much, is very apt to make us troublesome to other people. i am, &c, &c.
i am extremely pleased, my dear lady, that you have, at length, found a commission for me, that i can answer, without disappointing your expectations; though i must tell you, that it is not so easy as perhaps you think it; and that if my curiosity had not been more diligent than any other stranger's has ever yet been, i must have answered you with an excuse, as, i was forced to do, when you desired me to buy you a greek slave. i have got for you, as you desire, a turkish love-letter, which i have put into a little box, and ordered the captain of the smyrniote to deliver it to you with this letter. the translation of it is literally as follows: the first piece you should pull out of the purse, is a little pearl, which is in turkish called ingi, and must be understood in this manner:
ingi, sensin uzellerin gingi pearl, fairest of the young.
caremfil, caremfilsen cararen yok
clove, conge gulsum timarin yok
                   benseny chok than severim
                   senin benden, haberin yok.
you are as slender as the clove! you are an unblown rose! i have long loved you, and you have not known it!
pul, derdime derman bul jonquil, have pity on my passion!
kihat, birlerum sahat sahat paper, i faint every hour!
ermus, ver bixe bir umut pear, give me some hope.
jabun, derdinden oldum zabun soap, i am sick with love.
chemur, ben oliyim size umur coal, may i die, and all my years be yours!
gul ben aglarum sen gul a rose, may you be pleased, and your sorrows mine!
hasir, oliim sana yazir a straw, suffer me to be your slave.
jo ho, ustune bulunmaz pahu cloth, your price is not to be found.
tartsin, sen ghel ben chekeim senin hargin cinnamon, but my fortune is yours.
giro, esking-ilen oldum ghira a match, i burn, i burn! my flame consumes me!
sirma, uzunu benden a yirma goldthread, don't turn away your face.
satch, bazmazum tatch hair, crown of my head!
uzum benim iki guzum grape, my eyes!
til, ulugorum tez ghel gold wire, i die—come quickly.
and, by way of postscript:
beber, bize bir dogm haber pepper, send me an answer.
you see this letter is all in verse, and i can assure you, there is as much fancy shewn in the choice of them, as in the most studied expressions of our letters; there being, i believe, a million of verses designed for this use. there is no colour, no flower, no weed, no fruit, herb, pebble, or feather, that has not a verse belonging to it; and you may quarrel, reproach, or send letters of passion, friendship, or civility, or even of news, without ever inking your fingers.
i fancy you are now wondering at my profound learning; but, alas! dear madam, i am almost fallen into the misfortune so common to the ambitious; while they are employed on distant insignificant conquests abroad, a rebellion starts up at home;—i am in great danger of losing my english. i find 'tis not half so easy to me to write in it, as it was a twelvemonth ago. i am forced to study for expressions, and must leave off all other languages, and try to learn my mother tongue.—human understanding is as much limited as human power, or human strength. the memory can retain but a certain number of images; and 'tis as impossible for one human creature to be perfect master of ten different languages, as to have, in perfect subjection, ten different kingdoms, or to fight against ten men at a time; i am afraid i shall at last know none as i should do. i live in a place, that very well represents the tower of babel: in pera they speak turkish, greek, hebrew, armenian, arabic, persian, russian, sclavonian, walachian, german, dutch, french, english, italian, hungarian; and, what is worse, there are ten of these languages spoken in my own family. my grooms are arabs; my footmen french, english, and germans; my nurse an armenian; my house-maids russians; half a dozen other servants, greeks; my steward an italian; my janizaries turks; so that i live in the perpetual hearing of this medley of sounds, which produces a very extraordinary effect upon the people that are born here; for they learn all these languages at the same time, and without knowing any of them well enough to write or read in it. there are very few men, women, or even children here, that have not the same compass of words in five or six of them. i know, myself, several infants of three or four years old, that speak italian, french, greek, turkish, and russian, which last they learn of their nurses, who are generally of that country. this seems almost incredible to you, and is, in my mind, one of the most curious things in this country, and takes off very much from the merit of our ladies, who set up for such extraordinary geniuses, upon the credit of some superficial knowledge of french and italian.
as i prefer english to all the rest, i am extremely mortified at the daily decay of it in my head, where i'll assure you (with grief of heart) it is reduced to such a small number of words, i cannot recollect any tolerable phrase to conclude my letter with, and am forced to tell your ladyship very bluntly, that i am, your's, &c. &c.
at length i have heard from my dear lady b——, for the first time. i am persuaded you have had the goodness to write before, but i have had the ill fortune to lose your letters. since my last, i have staid (sic) quietly at constantinople, a city that i ought in conscience to give your ladyship a right notion of, since i know you can have none but what is partial and mistaken from the writings of travellers. 'tis certain, there are many people that pass years here in pera, without having ever seen it, and yet they all pretend to describe it. pera, tophana, and galata, wholly inhabited by french christians (and which, together, make the appearance of a very fine town,) are divided from it by the sea, which is not above half so broad as the broadest part of the thames; but the christian men are loth to hazard the adventures they sometimes meet with amongst the levents or seamen, (worse monsters than our watermen) and the women must cover their faces to go there, which they have a perfect aversion to do. 'tis true, they wear veils in pera, but they are such as only serve to shew their beauty to more advantage, and would not be permitted in constantinople. these reasons deter almost every creature from seeing it; and the french ambassadress will return to france (i believe) without ever having been there. you'll wonder, madam, to hear me add, that i have been there very often. the asmack, or turkish veil, is become not only very easy, but agreeable to me; and, if it was not, i would be content to endure some inconveniency, to gratify a passion that is become so powerful with me, as curiosity. and, indeed, the pleasure of going in a barge to chelsea, is not comparable to that of rowing upon the canal of the sea here, where, for twenty miles together, down the bosphorus, the most beautiful variety of prospects present themselves. the asian side is covered with fruit-trees, villages, and the most delightful landskips (sic) in nature; on the european, stands constantinople, situated on seven hills.—the unequal heights make it seem as large again as it is, (though one of the largest cities in the world) shewing an agreeable mixture of gardens, pine and cypress-trees, palaces, mosques, and public buildings, raised one above another, with as much beauty and appearance of symmetry, as your ladyship ever saw in a cabinet, adorned by the most skilful hands, where jars shew themselves above jars, mixed with canisters, babies and candlesticks. this is a very odd comparison; but it gives me an exact idea of the thing. i have taken care to see as much of the seraglio as is to be seen. it is on a point of land running into the sea; a palace of prodigious extent, but very irregular. the gardens take in a large compass of ground, full of high cypress-trees, which is all i know of them. the buildings are all of white stone, leaded on the top, with gilded turrets and spires, which look very magnificent; and, indeed, i believe there is no christian-king's palace half so large. there are six large courts in it, all built round, and set with trees, having galleries of stone; one of these for the guard, another for the slaves, another for the officers of the kitchen, another for the stables, the fifth for the divan, and the sixth for the apartment destined for audiences. on the ladies side, there are, at least, as many more, with distinct courts belonging to their eunuchs and attendants, their kitchens, &c.
the next remarkable structure is that of st sophia which is very difficult to see. i was forced to send three times to the caimairam, (the governor of the town) and he assembled the chief effendis, or heads of the law, and enquired of the mufti, whether it was lawful to permit it. they passed some days in this important debate; but i insisting on my request, permission was granted. i can't be informed why the turks are more delicate on the subject of this mosque, than on any of the others, where what christian pleases may enter without scruple. i fancy they imagine, that, having been once consecrated, people, on pretence of curiosity, might profane it with prayers, particularly to those saints, who are still very visible in mosaic work, and no other way defaced but by the decays of time; for it is absolutely false, though so universally asserted, that the turks defaced all the images that they found in the city. the dome of st sophia is said to be one hundred and thirteen feet diameter, built upon arches, sustained by vast pillars of marble, the pavement and stair-case marble. there are two rows of galleries, supported with pillars of party-coloured (sic) marble, and the whole roof mosaic work, part of which decays very fast, and drops down. they presented me a handful of it; its composition seems to me a sort of glass, or that paste with which they make counterfeit jewels. they shew here the tomb of the emperor constantine, for which they have a great veneration.
this is a dull, imperfect description, of this celebrated building; but i understand architecture so little, that i am afraid of talking nonsense, in endeavouring to speak of it particularly. perhaps i am in the wrong, but some turkish mosques please me better. that of sultan solyman is an exact square, with four fine towers in the angles, in the midst is a noble cupola, supported with beautiful marble pillars; two lesser at the ends, supported in the same manner; the pavement and gallery round the mosque, of marble; under the great cupola is a fountain, adorned with such fine coloured pillars, that i can hardly think them natural marble; on one side is the pulpit, of white marble, and on the other, the little gallery for the grand signior. a fine stair-case leads to it, and it is built up with gilded lattices. at the upper end is a sort of altar, where the name of god is written; and before it stand two candlesticks, as high as a man, with wax candles as thick as three flambeaux. the pavement is spread with fine carpets, and the mosque illuminated with a vast number of lamps. the court leading to it is very spacious, with galleries of marble, of green columns, covered with twenty-eight leaded cupolas on two sides, and a fine fountain of basins in the midst of it.
this description may serve for all the mosques in constantinople. the model is exactly the same, and they only differ in largeness and richness of materials. that of the sultana valida is the largest of all, built entirely of marble, the most prodigious, and, i think, the most beautiful structure i ever saw, be it spoken to the honour of our sex, for it was founded by the mother of mahomet iv. between friends, paul's church would make a pitiful figure near it, as any of our squares would do near the atlerdan, or place of horses, (at signifying a horse in turkish). this was the hippodrome, in the reign of the greek emperors. in the midst of it is a brazen column, of three serpents twisted together, with their mouths gaping. 'tis impossible to learn why so odd a pillar was erected; the greeks can tell nothing but fabulous legends, when they are asked the meaning of it, and there is no sign of its having ever had any inscription. at the upper end is an obelisk of porphyry, probably brought from egypt, the hieroglyphics all very entire, which i look upon as mere ancient puns. it is placed on four little brazen pillars, upon a pedestal of square free stone, full of figures in bas-relief on two sides; one square representing a battle, another an assembly. the others have inscriptions in greek and latin; the last i took in my pocket-book, and it is as follows:
             difficilis quondam, dominis parere serenis
              jussus, et extinctis palman portare tyrannis
              omnia theodosio cedunt, sobolique perenni.
your lord will interpret these lines. don't fancy they are a love-letter to him.
all the figures have their heads on; and i cannot forbear reflecting again on the impudence of authors, who all say they have not; but i dare swear the greatest part of them never saw them; but took the report from the greeks, who resist, with incredible fortitude, the conviction of their own eyes, whenever they have invented lies to the dishonour of their enemies. were you to believe them, there is nothing worth seeing in constantinople, but sancta sophia, though there are several large, and, in my opinion, more beautiful mosques in that city. that of sultan achmet has this particularity, that its gates are of brass. in all these mosques there are little chapels, where are the tombs of the founders and their families, with wax candles burning before them.
the exchanges are all noble buildings, full of fine alleys, the greatest part supported with pillars, and kept wonderfully neat. every trade has its distinct alley, where the merchandize is disposed in the same order as in the new exchange at london. the besisten, or jeweller's quarter, shews so much riches, such a vast quantity of diamonds, and all kinds of precious stones, that they dazzle the sight. the embroiderer's is also very glittering, and people walk here as much for diversion as business. the markets are most of them handsome squares, and admirably well provided, perhaps better than in any other part of the world.
i know, you'll expect i should say something particular of the slaves; and you will imagine me half a turk, when i don't speak of it with the same horror other christians have done before me. but i cannot forbear applauding the humanity of the turks to these creatures; they are never ill used, and their slavery is, in my opinion, no worse than servitude all over the world. 'tis true, they have no wages; but they give them yearly clothes to a higher value than our salaries to our ordinary servants. but you'll object, that men buy women with an eye to evil. in my opinion, they are bought and sold as publicly, and as infamously, in all our christian great cities.
i must add to the description of constantinople, that the historical pillar is no more. it dropped down about two years before i came to this part of the world. i have seen no other footsteps of antiquity, except the aqueducts, which are so vast, that i am apt to believe they are yet more ancient than the greek empire. the turks indeed have clapped in some stones with turkish inscriptions, to give their natives the honour of so great a work; but the deceit is easily discovered.—the other public buildings are the hanns and monasteries; the first are very large and numerous; the second few in number, and not at all magnificent. i had the curiosity to visit one of them, and to observe the devotions of the dervises, which are as whimsical as any at rome. these fellows have permission to marry, but are confined to an odd habit, which is only a piece of coarse white cloth, wrapped about them, with their legs and arms naked. their order has few other rules, except that of performing their fantastic rites, every tuesday and friday, which is done in this manner: they meet together in a large hall, where they all stand with their eyes fixed on the ground, and their arms across, while the imaum or preacher reads part of the alcoran from a pulpit placed in the midst; and when he has done, eight or ten of them make a melancholy concert with their pipes, which are no unmusical instruments. then he reads again, and makes a short exposition on what he has read; after which they sing and play, 'till their superior (the only one of them dressed in green) rises and begins a sort of solemn dance. they all stand about him in a regular figure; and while some play, the others tie their robe (which is very wide) fast round their waist, and begin to turn round with an amazing swiftness, and yet with great regard to the music, moving slower or faster as the tune is played. this lasts above an hour, without any of them shewing the least appearance of giddiness, which is not to be wondered at, when it is considered they are all used to it from their infancy; most of them being devoted to this way of life from their birth. there turned amongst them some little dervises, of six or seven years old, who seemed no more disordered by that exercise than the others. at the end of the ceremony, they shout out, there is no other god, but god, and mahomet his prophet; after which, they kiss the superior's hand, and retire. the whole is performed with the most solemn gravity. nothing can be more austere than the form of these people; they never raise their eyes, and seem devoted to contemplation. and as ridiculous as this is in description, there is something touching in the air of submission and mortification they assume.—this letter is of a horrible length; but you may burn it when you have read enough, &c. &c.
i am now preparing to leave constantinople, and perhaps you will accuse me of hypocrisy, when i tell you 'tis with regret, but as i am used to the air, and have learnt the language, i am easy here; and as much as i love travelling, i tremble at the inconveniencies attending so great a journey, with a numerous family, and a little infant hanging at the breast. however, i endeavour, upon this occasion, to do, as i have hitherto done in all the odd turns of my life; turn them, if i can, to my diversion. in order to this, i ramble every day, wrapped up in my serigee and asmack, about constantinople, and amuse myself with seeing all that is curious in it. i know you will expect that this declaration should be followed with some account of what i have seen. but i am in no humour to copy what has been writ so often over. to what purpose should i tell you, that constantinople is the ancient byzantium? that 'tis at present the conquest of a race of people, supposed scythians? that there are five or six thousand mosques in it? that sancta sophia was founded by justinian? &c. i'll assure you, 'tis not for want of learning, that i forbear writing all these bright things. i could also, with very little trouble, turn over knolles and sir paul rycaut, to give you a list of turkish emperors; but i will not tell you what you may find in every author that has writ of this country. i am more inclined, out of a true female spirit of contradiction, to tell you the falsehood of a great part of what you find in authors; as, for instance, in the admirable mr hill, who so gravely asserts, that he saw, in sancta sophia, a sweating pillar, very balsamic for disordered heads. there is not the least tradition of any such matter; and i suppose it was revealed to him in vision, during his wonderful stay in the egyptian catacombs; for i am sure he never heard of any such miracle here. 'tis also very pleasant to observe how tenderly he and all his brethren voyage-writers lament the miserable confinement of the turkish ladies, who are perhaps more free than any ladies in the universe, and are the only women in the world that lead a life of uninterrupted pleasure, exempt from cares; their whole time being spent in visiting, bathing, or the agreeable amusement of spending money, and inventing new fashions. a husband would be thought mad, that exacted any degree of economy from his wife, whose expences are no way limited but by her own fancy. 'tis his business to get money, and hers to spend it: and this noble prerogative extends itself to the very meanest of the sex. here is a fellow that carries embroidered handkerchiefs upon his back to sell. and as miserable a figure as you may suppose such a mean dealer, yet, i'll assure you, his wife scorns to wear any thing less than cloth of gold; has her ermine furs, and a very handsome set of jewels for her head. 'tis true, they have no places but the bagnios, and these can only be seen by their own sex; however, that is a diversion they take great pleasure in.
i was, three days ago, at one of the finest in the town, and had the opportunity of seeing a turkish bride received there, and all the ceremony used on that occasion, which made me recollect the epithalamium of helen, by theocritus; and it seems to me, that the same customs have continued ever since. all the she-friends, relations and acquaintance of the two families, newly allied, meet at the bagnio; several others go, out of curiosity, and i believe there were that day two hundred women. those that were, or had been married, placed themselves round the rooms, on the marble sofas; but the virgins very hastily threw off their clothes, and appeared without other ornament or covering, than their own long hair braided with pearl or ribbon. two of them met the bride at the door, conducted by her mother and another grave relation. she was a beautiful maid of about seventeen, very richly dressed, and shining with jewels, but was presently reduced to the state of nature. two others filled silver gilt pots with perfume, and began the procession, the rest following in pairs, to the number of thirty. the leaders sung an epithalamium, answered by the others in chorus, and the two last led the fair bride, her eyes fixed on the ground, with a charming affectation of modesty. in this order they marched round the three largest rooms of the bagnio. 'tis not easy to represent to you the beauty of this sight, most of them being well proportioned and white skinned; all of them perfectly smooth and polished by the frequent use of bathing. after having made their tour, the bride was again led to every matron round the rooms, who saluted her with a compliment and a present, some of jewels, others of pieces of stuff, handkerchiefs or little gallantries of that nature, which she thanked them for, by kissing their hands. i was very well pleased with having seen this ceremony; and you may believe me, the turkish ladies have, at least, as much wit and civility, nay liberty, as among us. 'tis true, the same customs that give them so many opportunities of gratifying their evil inclinations (if they have any), also put it very fully in the power of their husbands to revenge themselves, if they are discovered; and i do not doubt, but they suffer sometimes for their indiscretions in a very severe manner. about two months ago, there was found at day break, not very far from my house, the bleeding body of a young woman, naked, only wrapped in a course sheet, with two wounds of a knife, one in her side, and another in her breast. she was not quite cold, and was so surprisingly beautiful, that there were very few men in pera, that did not go to look upon her; but it was not possible for any body to know her, no woman's face being known. she was supposed to have been brought, in the dead of the night, from the constantinople side, and laid there. very little inquiry was made about the murderer, and the corpse was privately buried without noise. murder is never pursued by the king's officers, as with us. 'tis the business of the next relations to revenge the dead person; and if they like better to compound the matter for money (as they generally do) there is no more said of it. one would imagine this defect in their government should make such tragedies very frequent, yet they are extremely rare; which is enough to prove the people are not naturally cruel. neither do i think, in many other particulars, they deserve the barbarous character we give them. i am well acquainted with a christian woman of quality, who made it her choice to live with a turkish husband, and is a very agreeable sensible lady. her story is so extraordinary, i cannot forbear relating it; but i promise you, it shall be in as few words as i can possibly express it.
she is a spaniard, and was at naples with her family, when that kingdom was part of the spanish dominion. coming from thence in a felucca, accompanied by her brother, they were attacked by the turkish admiral, boarded and taken.—and now how shall i modestly tell you the rest of her adventure? the same accident happened to her, that happened to the fair lucretia so many years before her. but she was too good a christian to kill herself, as that heathenish roman did. the admiral was so much charmed with the beauty and long-suffering of the fair captive, that, as his first compliment, he gave immediate liberty to her brother and attendants, who made haste to spain, and, in a few months, sent the sum of four thousand pounds sterling, as a ransom for his sister. the turk took the money, which he presented to her, and told her she was at liberty. but the lady very discreetly weighed the different treatment she was likely to find in her native country. her relations (as the kindest thing they could do for her in her present circumstances) would certainly confine her to a nunnery for the rest of her days.—her infidel lover was very handsome, very tender, very fond of her, and lavished at her feet all the turkish magnificence. she answered him very resolutely, that her liberty was not so precious to her as her honour; that he could no way restore that, but by marrying her; and she therefore desired him to accept the ransom as her portion, and give her the satisfaction of knowing, that no man could boast of her favours, without being her husband. the admiral was transported at this kind offer, and sent back the money to her relations, saying, he was too happy in her possession. he married her, and never took any other wife, and (as she says herself) she never had reason to repent the choice she made. he left her, some years after, one of the richest widows in constantinople. but there is no remaining honourably a single woman, and that consideration has obliged her to marry the present captain bassa (i.e. admiral) his successor.—i am afraid that you will think my friend fell in love with her ravisher; but i am willing to take her word for it, that she acted wholly on principles of honour, though i think she might be reasonably touched at his generosity, which is often found amongst the turks of rank.
'tis a degree of generosity to tell the truth, and 'tis very rare that any turk will assert a solemn falsehood. i don't speak of the lowest sort; for as there is a great deal of ignorance, there is very little virtue amongst them; and false witnesses are much cheaper than in christendom; those wretches not being punished (even when they are publicly detected) with the rigour they ought to be.
now i am speaking of their law, i don't know whether i have ever mentioned to you one custom peculiar to their country, i mean adoption, very common amongst the turks, and yet more amongst the greeks and armenians. not having it in their power to give their estates to a friend or distant relation; to avoid its falling into the grand signior's treasury, when they are not likely to have any children of their own, they chuse some pretty child of either sex, amongst the meanest people, and carry the child and its parents before the cadi, and there declare they receive it for their heir. the parents, at the same time, renounce all future claim to it; a writing is drawn and witnessed, and a child thus adopted, cannot be disinherited. yet i have seen some common beggars, that have refused to part with their children in this manner, to some of the richest among the greeks; (so powerful is the instinctive affection that is natural to parents!) though the adopting fathers are generally very tender to these children of their souls, as they call them. i own this custom pleases me much better than our absurd one of following our name. methinks, 'tis much more reasonable to make happy and rich an infant whom i educate after my own manner, brought up (in the turkish phrase) upon my knees, and who has learned to look upon me with a filial respect, than to give an estate to a creature, without other merit or relation to me, than that of a few letters. yet this is an absurdity we see frequently practised.—now i have mentioned the armenians, perhaps it will be agreeable to tell you something of that nation, with which i am sure you are utterly unacquainted. i will not trouble you with the geographical account of the situation of their country, which you may see in the maps; or a relation of their ancient greatness, which you may read in the roman history. they are now subject to the turks; and, being very industrious in trade, and increasing and multiplying, are dispersed in great numbers through all the turkish dominions. they were, as they say, converted to the christian religion by st gregory, and are perhaps the devoutest (sic), christians in the whole world. the chief precepts of their priests enjoin the strict keeping of their lents, which are, at least seven months in every year, and are not to be dispensed with on the most emergent necessity; no occasion whatever can excuse them, if they touch any thing more than mere herbs or roots (without oil) and plain dry bread. that is their constant diet.—mr w——y has one of his interpreters of this nation, and the poor fellow was brought so low, by the severity of his fasts, that his life was despaired of. yet neither his master's commands, nor the doctor's entreaties (who declared nothing else could save his life) were powerful enough to prevail with him to take two or three spoonfuls of broth. excepting this, which may rather be called a custom than an article of faith, i see very little in their religion different from ours. 'tis true, they seem to incline very much to mr whiston's doctrine; neither do i think the greek church very distant from it, since 'tis certain, the holy spirit's proceeding only from the father, is making a plain subordination in the son.—but the armenians have no notion of transubstantiation, whatever account sir paul rycaut gives of them, (which account, i am apt to believe, was designed to compliment our court in 1679;) and they have a great horror for those amongst them, that change to the roman religion. what is most extraordinary in their customs, is their matrimony; a ceremony, i believe, unparallell'd (sic) all over the world. they are always promised very young; but the espoused never see one another, till three days after their marriage. the bride is carried to church, with a cap on her head, in the fashion of a large trencher, and over it a red silken veil, which covers her all over to her feet. the priest asks the bridegroom, whether he is contented to marry that woman, be she deaf, be she blind? these are the literal words: to which having answered, yes, she is led home to his house, accompanied with all the friends and relations on both sides, singing and dancing, and is placed on a cushion in the corner of the sofa; but her veil is never lifted up, not even by her husband. there is something so odd and monstrous in these ways, that i could not believe them, till i had inquired of several armenians myself, who all assured me of the truth of them, particularly one young fellow, who wept when he spoke of it, being promised by his mother to a girl that he must marry in this manner, though he protested to me, he had rather die than submit to this slavery, having already figured his bride to himself with all the deformities of nature.—i fancy i see you bless yourself at this terrible relation. i cannot conclude my letter with a more surprising story; yet 'tis as seriously true, as that i am, dear sister, yours, &c. &c.
i beg your pardon, my dear sister, that i did not write to you from tunis, the only opportunity i have had since i left constantinople. but the heat there was so excessive, and the light so bad for the sight, i was half blind by writing one letter to the abbot ——, and durst not go to write many others i had designed; nor indeed could i have entertained you very well out of that barbarous country. i am now surrounded with subjects of pleasure, and so much charmed with the beauties of italy, that i should think it a kind of ingratitude not to offer a little praise in return for the diversion i have had here.—i am in the house of mrs d'avenant at st pierre d'arena, and should be very unjust not to allow her a share of that praise i speak of, since her good humour and good company have very much contributed to render this place agreeable to me.
genoa is situated in a very fine bay; and being built on a rising hill, extermixed (sic) with gardens, and beautified with the most excellent architecture, gives a very fine prospect off at sea; though it lost much of its beauty in my eyes, having been accustomed to that of constantinople. the genoese were once masters of several islands in the archipelago, and all that part of constantinople which is now called galata. their betraying the christian cause, by facilitating the taking of constantinople by the turk, deserved what has since happened to them, even the loss of all their conquests on that side to those infidels. they are at present far from rich, and are despised by the french, since their doge was forced by the late king to go in person to paris, to ask pardon for such a trifle as the arms of france over the house of the envoy, being spattered with dung in the night. this, i suppose, was done by some of the spanish faction, which still makes up the majority here, though they dare not openly declare it. the ladies affect the french habit, and are more genteel than those they imitate. i do not doubt but the custom of cizisbei's has very much improved their airs. i know not whether you ever heard of those animals. upon my word, nothing but my own eyes could have convinced me there were any such upon earth. the fashion began here, and is now received all over italy, where the husbands are not such terrible creatures as we represent them. there are none among them such brutes, as to pretend to find fault with a custom so well established, and so politically founded, since i am assured, that it was an expedient, first found out by the senate, to put an end to those family hatreds, which tore their state to pieces, and to find employment for those young men who were forced to cut one another's throats, pour passer le temps: and it has succeeded so well, that since the institution of cizisbei, there has been nothing but peace and good humour amongst them. these are gentlemen who devote themselves to the service of a particular lady (i mean a married one) for the virgins are all invisible, and confined to convents: they are obliged to wait on her to all public places, such as the plays, operas, and assemblies, (which are called here conversations) where they wait behind her chair, take care of her fan and gloves, if she plays, have the privilege of whispers, &c.—when she goes out, they serve her instead of lacquies (sic), gravely trotting by her chair. 'tis their business to prepare for her a present against any day of public appearance, not forgetting that of her own name [footnote: that is, the day of the saint after whom she is called.]; in short, they are to spend all their time and money in her service, who rewards them accordingly (for opportunity they want none) but the husband is not to have the impudence to suppose this any other than pure platonic friendship. 'tis true, they endeavour to give her a cizisbei of their own chusing; but when the lady happens not to be of the same taste, as that often happens, she never fails to bring it about to have one of her own fancy. in former times, one beauty used to have eight or ten of these humble admirers; but those days of plenty and humility are no more. men grow more scarce and saucy, and every lady is forced to content herself with one at a time.
you may see in this place the glorious liberty of a republic, or more properly, an aristocracy, the common people being here as arrant slaves as the french; but the old nobles pay little respect to the doge, who is but two years in his office, and whose wife, at that very time, assumes no rank above another noble lady. 'tis true, the family of andrea doria (that great man, who restored them that liberty they enjoy) have some particular privileges. when the senate found it necessary to put a stop to the luxury of dress, forbidding the wearing of jewels and brocades, they left them at liberty to make what expence they pleased. i look with great pleasure on the statue of that hero, which is in the court belonging to the house of duke doria. this puts me in mind of their palaces, which i can never describe as i ought.—is it not enough, that i say, they are, most of them, the design of palladio? the street called strada nova, is perhaps the most beautiful line of building in the world. i must particularly mention the vast palaces of durazzo, those of the two balbi, joined together by a magnificent colonade (sic), that of the imperiale at this village of st pierre d'arena, and another of the doria. the perfection of architecture, and the utmost profusion of rich furniture are to be seen here, disposed with the most elegant taste, and lavish magnificence. but i am charmed with nothing so much as the collection of pictures by the pencils of raphael, paulo veronese, titian, caracci, michael angelo, guido, and corregio, which two i mention last as my particular favourites. i own, i can find no pleasure in objects of horror; and, in my opinion, the more naturally a crucifix is represented, the more disagreeable it is. these, my beloved painters, shew nature, and shew it in the most charming light. i was particularly pleased with a lucretia in the house of balbi; the expressive beauty of that face and bosom, gives all the passion of pity and adoration, that could be raised in the soul, by the finest artist on that subject. a cleopatra of the same hand, deserves to be mentioned; and i should say more of her if lucretia had not first engaged my eyes.—here are also some inestimable ancient bustos (sic).—the church of st lawrence is built of black and white marble, where is kept that famous plate of a single emerald, which is not now permitted to be handled, since a plot, which, they say, was discovered, to throw it on the pavement and break it; a childish piece of malice, which they ascribe to the king of sicily, to be revenged for their refusing to sell it to him. the church of the annunciation is finely lined with marble; the pillars are of red and white marble; that of st ambrose has been very much adorned by the jesuits; but i confess, all the churches appeared so mean to me, after that of sancta sophia, i can hardly do them the honour of writing down their names. but i hope you will own, i have made good use of my time, in seeing so much, since 'tis not many days that we have been out of the quarantine, from which no body is exempted coming from the levant. ours, indeed, was very much shortened, and very agreeably passed in mrs d'avenant's company, in the village of st pierre d'arena, about a mile from genoa, in a house built by palladio, so well designed, and so nobly proportioned, 'twas a pleasure to walk in it. we were visited here only by a few english, in the company of a noble genoese; commissioned to see we did not touch one another.—i shall stay here some days longer, and could almost wish it were for all my life; but mine, i fear, is not destined to so much tranquillity. i am, &c. &c.
i came in two days from genoa, through fine roads, to this place. i have already seen what is shewed to strangers in the town, which, indeed, is not worth a very particular description; and i have not respect enough for the holy handkerchief, to speak long of it. the churches are handsome, and so is the king's palace; but i have lately seen such perfection of architecture, i did not give much of my attention to these pieces. the town itself is fairly built, situated in a fine plain on the banks of the po. at a little distance from it, we saw the palaces of la venerie, and la valentin, both very agreeable retreats. we were lodged in the piazza royale, which is one of the noblest squares i ever saw, with a fine portico of white stone quite round it. we were immediately visited by the chevalier ——, whom you knew in england; who, with great civility, begged to introduce us at court, which is now kept at rivoli, about a league from turin. i went thither yesterday, and had the honour of waiting on the queen, being presented to her by her first lady of honour. i found her majesty in a magnificent apartment, with a train of handsome ladies, all dressed in gowns, amongst which it was easy to distinguish the fair princess of carignan. the queen entertained me with a world of sweetness and affability, and seemed mistress of a great share of good sense. she did not forget to put me in mind of her english blood; and added, that she always felt in herself a particular inclination to love the english. i returned her civility, by giving her the title of majesty, as often as i could, which, perhaps, she will not have the comfort of hearing many months longer.—the king has a great deal of vivacity in his eyes; and the young prince of piedmont is a very handsome young man; but the great devotion which this court is, at present, fallen into, does not permit any of those entertainments proper for his age. processions and masses are all the magnificence in fashion here; and gallantry is so criminal, that the poor count of ——, who was our acquaintance at london, is very seriously disgraced, for some small overtures he presumed to make to a maid of honour. i intend to set out tomorrow, and to pass those dreadful alps, so much talked of.—if i come to the bottom, you shall hear of me.—i am, &c. &c.
i received, at my arrival here, both your obliging letters, and also letters from many of my other friends, designed to constantinople, and sent me from marseilles hither; our merchant there, knowing we were upon our return. i am surprised to hear my sister has left england. i suppose what i wrote to her from turin will be lost, and where to direct i know not, having no account of her affairs from her own hand. for my own part, i am confined to my chamber, having kept my bed till yesterday, ever since the 17th, that i came to this town, where i have had so terrible a fever, i believed, for some time, that all my journeys were ended here; and i do not at all wonder, that such fatigues as i have passed, should have such an effect. the first day's journey from turin to novalesse, is through a very fine country, beautifully planted, and enriched by art and nature. the next day we began to ascend mount cenis, being carried in little seats of twisted osiers, fixed upon poles, upon mens shoulders; our chaises taken to pieces, and laid upon mules.
the prodigious prospect of mountains covered with eternal snow, of clouds hanging far below our feet, and of vast cascades tumbling down the rocks with a confused roaring, would have been entertaining to me, if i had suffered less from the extreme cold that reigns here. but the misty rains which fall perpetually, penetrated even the thick fur i was wrapped in; and i was half dead with cold, before we got to the foot of the mountain, which was not till two hours after dark. this hill has a spacious plain on the top of it, and a fine lake there; but the descent is so steep and slippery, 'tis surprising to see these chairmen go so steadily as they do. yet i was not half so much afraid of breaking my neck, as i was of falling sick; and the event has shewed, that i placed my fears right.
the other mountains are now all passable for a chaise, and very fruitful in vines and pastures: amongst them is a breed of the finest goats in the world. acquebellet is the last, and soon after we entered pont beauvoisin, the frontier town of france, whose bridge parts this kingdom, and the dominions of savoy. the same night we arrived late at this town, where i have had nothing to do, but to take care of my health. i think myself already out of any danger; and am determined, that the sore throat, which still remains, shall not confine me long. i am impatient to see the curiosities of this famous city, and more impatient to continue my journey to paris, from whence i hope to write you a more diverting letter than 'tis possible for me to do now, with a mind weakened by sickness, a head muddled with spleen, from a sorry inn, and a chamber crammed with mortifying objects of apothecaries vials and bottles.—i am, &c. &c.
i cannot give my dear lady r—— a better proof of the pleasure i have in writing to her, than chusing to do it in this seat of various amusements, where i am accableed with visits, and those so full of vivacity and compliments, that 'tis full employment enough to hearken, whether one answers or not. the french ambassadress at constantinople has a very considerable and numerous family here, who all come to see me, and are never weary of making inquiries. the air of paris has already had a good effect on me; for i was never in better health, though i have been extremely ill all the road from lyons to this place. you may judge how agreeable the journey has been to me; which did not want that addition to make me dislike it. i think nothing so terrible as objects of misery, except one had the god-like attribute of being capable to redress them; and all the country villages of france shew nothing else. while the post horses are changed, the whole town comes out to beg, with such miserable starved faces, and thin tattered cloths, they need no other eloquence, to persuade one of the wretchedness of their condition. this is all the french magnificence, till you come to fountainbleau, when you are shewed one thousand five hundred rooms in the king's hunting palace. the apartments of the royal family are very large, and richly gilt; but i saw nothing in the architecture or painting worth remembering. the long gallery, built by henry iv. has prospects of all the king's houses. its walls are designed after the taste of those times, but appear now very mean. the park is, indeed, finely wooded and watered, the trees well grown and planted, and in the fish-ponds are kept tame carp, said to be, some of them, eighty years of age. the late king passed some months every year at this seat; and all the rocks round it, by the pious sentences inscribed on them, shew the devotion in fashion at his court, which i believe died with him; at least, i see no exterior marks of it at paris, where all peoples thoughts seem to be on present diversion.
the fair of st lawrence is now in season. you may be sure i have been carried thither, and think it much better disposed than ours of bartholomew. the shops being all set in rows so regularly and well lighted, they made up a very agreeable spectacle. but i was not at all satisfied with the grossierte of their harlequin, no more than with their music at the opera, which was abominably grating, after being used to that of italy. their house is a booth, compared to that of the hay-market, and the play-house not so neat as that of lincoln's-inn-fields; but then it must be owned, to their praise, their tragedians are much beyond any of ours. i should hardly allow mrs o——d a better place than to be confidante to la ——. i have seen the tragedy of bajazet so well represented, that i think our best actors can be only said to speak, but these to feel; and 'tis certainly infinitely more moving to see a man appear unhappy, than to hear him say that he is so, with a jolly face, and a stupid smirk in his countenance.—a propos of countenances, i must tell you something of the french ladies; i have seen all the beauties, and such—(i can't help making use of the coarse word) nauseous creatures! so fantastically absurd in their dress! so monstrously unnatural in their paints! their hair cut short, and curled round their faces, and so loaded with powder, that it makes it look like white wool! and on their cheeks to their chins, unmercifully laid on a shining red japan, that glistens in a most flaming manner, so that they seem to have no resemblance to human faces. i am apt to believe, that they took the first hint of their dress from a fair sheep newly ruddled. 'tis with pleasure i recollect my dear pretty country-women: and if i was writing to any body else, i should say, that these grotesque daubers give me still a higher esteem of the natural charms of dear lady r——'s auburne (sic) hair, and the lively colours of her unsullied complexion. i am, &c. &c.
p. s. i have met the abbe here, who desires me to make his compliments to you.
i find, after all, by your letter of yesterday, that mrs d—— is resolved to marry the old greasy curate. she was always high-church in an excessive degree; and, you know, she used to speak of sacheveral as an apostolic saint, who was worthy to sit in the same place with st paul, if not a step above him. it is a matter, however, very doubtful to me, whether it is not still more the man than the apostle that mrs d—— looks to in the present alliance. though at the age of forty, she is, i assure you, very far from being cold and insensible; her fire may be covered with ashes, but it is not extinguished.—don't be deceived, my dear, by that prudish and sanctified air.—warm devotions is no equivocal mark of warm passions; besides, i know it is a fact, (of which i have proofs in hand, which i will tell you by word of mouth) that our learned and holy prude is exceedingly disposed to use the means, supposed in the primitive command, let what will come of the end. the curate indeed is very filthy.—such a red, spungy (sic), warty nose! such a squint!—in short, he is ugly beyond expression; and, what ought naturally to render him peculiarly displeasing to one of mrs d——'s constitution and propensities, he is stricken in years. nor do i really know how they will live. he has but forty-five pounds a-year—she but a trifling sum; so that they are likely to feast upon love and ecclesiastical history which will be very empty food, without a proper mixture of beef and pudding. i have however, engaged our friend, who is the curate's landlord, to give them a good lease; and if mrs d——, instead of spending whole days in reading collier, hicks, and vile translations of plato and epictetus; will but form the resolution of taking care of her house, and minding her dairy, things may go tolerably. it is not likely that their tender loves will give them many sweet babes to provide for.
i met the lover yesterday, going to the ale-house in his dirty nightgown, with a book under his arm, to entertain the club; and, as mrs d—— was with me at the time, i pointed out to her the charming creature: she blushed, and looked prim; but quoted a passage out of herodotus, in which it is said that the persians wore long night-gowns. there is really no more accounting for the taste in marriage of many of our sex, than there is for the appetite of your miss s——y, who makes such waste of chalk and charcoal, when they fall in her way.
as marriage produces children, so children produce care and disputes; and wrangling, as is said (at least by old batchelors (sic) and old maids) is one of the sweets of the conjugal state. you tell me that our friend mrs —— is, at length, blessed with a son, and that her husband, who is a great philosopher, (if his own testimony is to be depended upon) insists on her suckling it herself. you ask my advice on this matter; and, to give it you frankly, i really think that mr ——'s demand is unreasonable, as his wife's constitution is tender, and her temper fretful. a true philosopher would consider these circumstances; but a pedant is always throwing his system in your face, and applies it equally to all things, times and places, just like a taylor who would make a coat out of his own head, without any regard to the bulk or figure of the person that must wear it. all those fine-spun arguments that he has drawn from nature, to stop your mouths, weigh, i must own to you, but very little with me. this same nature is, indeed, a specious word, nay there is a great deal in it, if it is properly understood and applied; but i cannot bear to hear people using it, to justify what common sense must disavow. is not nature modified by art in many things? was it not designed to be so? and is it not happy for human society, that it is so? would you like to see your husband let his beard grow, until he would be obliged to put the end of it in his pocket, because this beard is the gift of nature? the instincts of nature point out neither taylors, nor weavers, nor mantua-makers, nor sempsters, nor milliners; and yet i am very glad that we do not run naked like the hottentots. but not to wander from the subject—i grant, that nature has furnished the mother with milk to nourish her child; but i maintain, at the same time, that if she can find better milk elsewhere, she ought to prefer it without hesitation. i don't see why she should have more scruple to do this, than her husband has to leave the clear fountain which nature gave him, to quench his thirst, for stout october, port, or claret. indeed, if mrs —— was a buxom, sturdy woman, who lived on plain food, took regular exercise, enjoyed proper returns of rest, and was free from violent passions (which you and i know is not the case) she might be a good nurse for her child; but, as matters stand, i do verily think, that the milk of a good comely cow, who feeds quietly in her meadow, never devours ragouts, nor drinks ratifia, nor frets at quadrille, nor sits up till three in the morning, elated with gain, or dejected with loss; i do think, that the milk of such a cow, or of a nurse that came as near it as possible, would be likely to nourish the young squire much better than hers. if it be true that the child sucks in the mother's passions with her milk, this is a strong argument in favour of the cow, unless you may be afraid that the young squire may become a calf; but how many calves are there both in state and church, who have been brought up with their mother's milk.
i promise faithfully, to communicate to no mortal the letter you wrote me last.—what you say of two of the rebel lords, i believe to be true; but i can do nothing in the matter.—if my projects don't fail in the execution, i shall see you before a month passes. give my service to dr blackbeard.—he is a good man, but i never saw in my life, such a persecuting face cover a humane and tender heart. i imagine (within myself) that the smithfield priests, who burned the protestants in the time of queen mary, had just such faces as the doctor's. if we were papists, i should like him very much for my confessor; his seeming austerity would give you and i a great reputation for sanctity; and his good, indulgent heart, would be the very thing that would suit us, in the affair of penance and ghostly direction. farewell, my dear lady, &c. &c.
i set out from bologne (sic) the moment i had finished the letter i wrote you on monday last, and shall now continue to inform you of the things that have struck me most in this excursion. sad roads—hilly and rocky—between bologna and fierenzuola. between this latter place and florence, i went out of my road to visit the monastery of la trappe, which is of french origin, and one of the most austere and self-denying orders i have met with. in this gloomy retreat, it gave me pain to observe the infatuation of men, who have devoutly reduced themselves to a much worse condition than that of the beasts. folly, you see, is the lot of humanity, whether it arises in the flowery paths of pleasure, or the thorny ones of an ill-judged devotion. but of the two sorts of fools, i shall always think that the merry one has the most eligible fate; and i cannot well form a notion of that spiritual and ecstatic joy, that is mixed with sighs, groans, hunger and thirst, and the other complicated miseries of monastic discipline. it is a strange way of going to work for happiness, to excite an enmity between soul and body, which nature and providence have designed to live together in an union and friendship, and which we cannot separate like man and wife, when they happen to disagree. the profound silence that is enjoined upon the monks of la trappe, is a singular circumstance of their unsociable and unnatural discipline; and were this injunction never to be dispensed with, it would be needless to visit them in any other character than as a collection of statues; but the superior of the convent suspended, in our favour, that rigorous law, and allowed one of the mutes to converse with me, and answer a few discreet questions. he told me, that the monks of this order in france are still more austere than those of italy, as they never taste wine, flesh, fish, or eggs; but live entirely upon vegetables. the story that is told of the institution of this order is remarkable, and is well attested, if my information be good. its founder was a french nobleman, whose name was bouthillier da (sic) rance, a man of pleasure and gallantry, which were converted into the deepest gloom of devotion, by the following incident. his affairs obliged him to absent himself for some time, from a lady with whom he had lived in the most intimate and tender connections of successful love. at his return to paris, he proposed to surprise her agreeably; and, at the same time, to satisfy his own impatient desire of seeing her, by going directly, and without ceremony, to her apartment by a back stair, which he was well acquainted with.—but think of the spectacle that presented itself to him at his entrance into the chamber that had so often been the scene of love's highest raptures! his mistress dead—dead of the small-pox—disfigured beyond expression—a loathsome mass of putrified (sic) matter—and the surgeon separating the head from the body, because the coffin had been made too short! he stood for a moment motionless in amazement, and filled with horror—and then retired from the world, shut himself up in the convent of la trappe, where he passed the remainder of his days in the most cruel and disconsolate devotion.—let us quit this sad subject.
i must not forget to tell you, that before i came to this monastery, i went to see the burning mountains near fierenzuola, of which the naturalists speak as a great curiosity. the flame it sends forth is without smoke, and resembles brandy set on fire. the ground about it is well cultivated, and the fire appears only in one spot where there is a cavity, whose circumference is small, but in it are several crevices whose depths are unknown. it is remarkable, that when a piece of wood is thrown into this cavity, though it cannot pass through the crevices, yet it is consumed in a moment; and that though the ground about it be perfectly cold, yet if a stick be rubbed with any force against it, it emits a flame, which, however, is neither hot nor durable like that of the volcano. if you desire a more circumstantial account of this phenomenon, and have made a sufficient progress in italian, to read father carazzi's description of it, you need not be at a loss, for i have sent this description to mr f——, and you have only to ask it of him. after observing the volcano, i scrambled up all the neighbouring hills, partly on horse-back, partly on foot, but could find no vestige of fire in any of them; though common report would make one believe that they all contain volcanos.
i hope you have not taken it in your head to expect from me a description of the famous gallery, here, where i arrived on thursday at noon; this would be requiring a volume instead of a letter; besides i have as yet seen but a part of this immense treasure, and i propose employing some weeks more to survey the whole. you cannot imagine any situation more agreeable than florence. it lies in a fertile and smiling valley watered by the arno, which runs through the city; and nothing can surpass the beauty and magnificence of its public buildings, particularly the cathedral, whose grandeur filled me with astonishment. the palaces, squares, fountains, statues, bridges, do not only carry an aspect full of elegance and greatness, but discover a taste quite different, in kind, from that which reigns in the public edifices in other countries. the more i see of italy, the more i am persuaded that the italians have a style (if i may use that expression) in every thing, which distinguishes them almost essentially from all other europeans. where they have got it,—whether from natural genius or ancient imitation and inheritance, i shall not examine; but the fact is certain. i have been but one day in the gallery, that amazing repository of the most precious remains of antiquity, and which alone is sufficient to immortalize the illustrious house of medicis, by whom it was built, and enriched as we now see it. i was so impatient to see the famous venus of medicis, that i went hastily through six apartments, in order to get a sight of this divine figure; purposing (sic), when i had satisfied this ardent curiosity, to return and view the rest at my leisure. as i, indeed, passed through the great room which contains the ancient statues, i was stopped short at viewing the antinous, which they have placed near that of adrian, to revive the remembrance of their preposterous loves; which, i suppose, the florentines rather look upon as an object of envy, than of horror and disgust. this statue, like that of the venus de medicis, spurns description: such figures my eyes never beheld.—i can now understand that ovid's comparing a fine woman to a statue, which i formerly thought a very disobliging similitude, was the nicest and highest piece of flattery. the antinous is entirely naked, all its parts are bigger than nature; but the whole, taken together, and the fine attitude of the figure, carry such an expression of ease, elegance and grace, as no words can describe. when i saw the venus i was rapt in wonder,—and i could not help casting a thought back upon antinous. they ought to be placed together; they are worthy of each other.—if marble could see and feel, the separation might be prudent,—if it could only see, it would certainly lose its coldness, and learn to feel; and, in such a case, the charms of these two figures would produce an effect quite opposite to that of the gorgon's head, which turned flesh into stone. did i pretend to describe to you the venus, it would only set your imagination at work to form ideas of her figure; and your ideas would no more resemble that figure, than the portuguese face of miss ——, who has enchanted our knights, resembles the sweet and graceful countenance of lady ——, his former flame. the description of a face or figure, is a needless thing, as it never conveys a true idea; it only gratifies the imagination with a fantastic one, until the real one is seen. so, my dear, if you have a mind to form a true notion of the divine forms and features of the venus and antinous, come to florence.
i would be glad to oblige you and your friend vertue, by executing your commission with respect to the sketches of raphael's cartoons at hampton-court; but i cannot do it to my satisfaction. i have, indeed, seen, in the grand duke's collection, four pieces, in which that wonderful artist had thrown freely from his pencil the first thoughts and rude lines of some of these compositions; and as the first thoughts of a great genius are precious, these pieces attracted my curiosity in a particular manner; but when i went to examine them closely, i found them so damaged and effaced, that they did not at all answer my expectation. whether this be owing to negligence or envy, i cannot say; i mention the latter, because it is notorious, that many of the modern painters have discovered ignoble marks of envy at a view of the inimitable productions of the ancients. instead of employing their art to preserve the master-pieces of antiquity, they have endeavoured to destroy and efface many of them. i have seen with my own eyes an evident proof of this at bologna, where the greatest part of the paintings in fresco on the walls of the convent of st michael in bosco, done by the carracci, and guido rheni, have been ruined by the painters, who, after having copied some of the finest heads, scraped them almost entirely out with nails. thus, you see, nothing is exempt from human malignity.
the word malignity, and a passage in your letter, call to my mind the wicked wasp of twickenham; his lies affect me now no more; they will be all as much despised as the story of the seraglio and the handkerchief, of which i am persuaded he was the only inventor. that man has a malignant and ungenerous heart; and he is base enough to assume the mark of a moralist in order to decry human nature, and to give a decent vent to his hatred to man and woman kind.—but i must quit this contemptible subject, on which a just indignation would render my pen so fertile, that, after having fatigued you with a long letter, i would surfeit you with a supplement twice as long. besides, a violent head-ach (sic) advertises me that it is time to lay down my pen and get me to bed. i shall say some things to you in my next, that i would have you to impart to the strange man, as from yourself. my mind is at present tolerably quiet; if it were as dead to sin, as it is to certain connections, i should be a great saint. adieu, my dear madam. yours very affectionately, &c.