perhaps you'll laugh at me for thanking you very gravely for all the obliging concern you express for me. 'tis certain that i may, if i please, take the fine things you say to me for wit and raillery; and, it may be, it would be taking them right. but i never, in my life, was half so well disposed to take you in earnest as i am at present; and that distance which makes the continuation of your friendship improbable, has very much increased my faith in it. i find that i have, (as well as the rest of my sex) whatever face i set on't, a strong disposition to believe in miracles. don't fancy, however, that i am infected by the air of these popish countries; i have, indeed, so far wandered from the discipline of the church of england, as to have been last sunday at the opera, which was performed in the garden of the favorita; and i was so much pleased with it, i have not yet repented my seeing it. nothing of that kind ever was more magnificent; and i can easily believe what i am told, that the decorations and habits cost the emperor thirty thousand pounds sterling. the stage was built over a very large canal, and, at the beginning of the second act, divided into two parts, discovering the water, on which there immediately came, from different parts, two fleets of little gilded vessels, that gave the representation of a naval fight. it is not easy to imagine the beauty of this scene, which i took particular notice of. but all the rest were perfectly fine in their kind. the story of the opera is the enchantment of alcina, which gives opportunities for great variety of machines, and changes of the scenes, which are performed with a surprising swiftness. the theatre is so large, that it is hard to carry the eye to the end of it, and the habits in the utmost magnificence, to the number of one hundred and eight. no house could hold such large decorations: but the ladies all sitting in the open air, exposes them to great inconveniences; for there is but one canopy for the imperial family; and the first night it was represented, a shower of rain happening, the opera was broke off, and the company crowded away in such confusion, that i was almost squeezed to death.—but if their operas are thus delightful, their comedies are in as high a degree ridiculous. they have but one play-house, where i had the curiosity to go to a german comedy, and was very glad it happened to be the story of amphitrion (sic). as that subject has been already handled by a latin, french, and english poet, i was curious to see what an austrian author would make of it. i understand enough of that language to comprehend the greatest part of it; and besides, i took with me a lady, that had the goodness to explain to me every word. the way is, to take a box, which holds four, for yourself and company. the fixed price is a gold ducat. i thought the house very low and dark; but i confess, the comedy admirably recompensed that defect. i never laughed so much in my life. it began with jupiter's falling in love out of a peep-hole in the clouds, and ended with the birth of hercules. but what was most pleasant, was the use jupiter made of his metamorphosis; for you no sooner saw him under the figure of amphitrion, but, instead of flying to alcmena, with the raptures mr dryden puts into his mouth, he sends for amphitrion's taylor, and cheats him of a laced coat, and his banker of a bag of money, a jew of a diamond ring, and bespeaks a great supper in his name; and the greatest part of the comedy turns upon poor amphitrion's being tormented by these people for their debts. mercury uses sofia in the same manner. but i could not easily pardon the liberty the poet has taken of larding his play with, not only indecent expressions, but such gross words, as i don't think our mob would suffer from a mountebank. besides, the two sofias very fairly let down their breeches in the direct view of the boxes, which were full of people of the first rank, that seemed very well pleased with their entertainment, and assured me, this was a celebrated piece. i shall conclude my letter with this remarkable relation, very well worthy the serious consideration of mr collier. i won't trouble you with farewel (sic) compliments, which i think generally as impertinent, as courtesies at leaving the room, when the visit had been too long already.
i deserve not all the reproaches you make me. if i have some time without answering your letter, it is not, that i don't know how many thanks are due to you for it; or that i am stupid enough to prefer any amusements to the pleasure of hearing from you; but after the professions of esteem you have so obligingly made me, i cannot help delaying, as long as i can, shewing you that you are mistaken. if you are sincere, when you say you expect to be extremely entertained by my letters, i ought to be mortified at the disappointment that i am sure you will receive when you hear from me; though i have done my best endeavours to find out something worth writing to you. i have seen every thing that was to be seen with a very, diligent curiosity. here are some fine villas, particularly the late prince of litchtenstein's (sic); but the statues are all modern, and the pictures not of the first hands. 'tis true, the emperor has some of great value. i was yesterday to see the repository, which they call his treasure, where they seem to have been more diligent in amassing a great quantity of things, than in the choice of them. i spent above five hours there, and yet there were very few things that stopped me long to consider them. but the number is prodigious, being a very long gallery filled on both sides, and five large rooms. there is a vast quantity of paintings, amongst which are many fine miniatures; but the most valuable pictures, are a few of corregio (sic), those of titian being at the favorita.
the cabinet of jewels did not appear to me so rich as i expected to see it. they shewed me here a cup, about the size of a tea dish, of one entire emerald, which they had so particular a respect for, that only the emperor has the liberty of touching it. there is a large cabinet full of curiosities of clock-work, only one of which i thought worth observing, that was a craw-fish, with all the motions so natural, that it was hard to distinguish it from the life.
the next cabinet was a large collection of agates, some of them extremely beautiful, and of an uncommon size, and several vases of lapis lazuli. i was surprised to see the cabinet of medals so poorly furnished; i did not remark one of any value, and they are kept in a most ridiculous disorder. as to the antiques, very few of them deserve that name. upon my saying they were modern, i could not forbear laughing at the answer of the profound antiquary that shewed them, that they were ancient enough; for, to his knowledge, they had been there these forty years. but the next cabinet diverted me yet better, being nothing else but a parcel of wax babies, and toys in ivory, very well worthy to be presented children of five years old. two of the rooms were wholly filled with these trifles of all kinds, set in jewels, amongst which i was desired to observe a crucifix, that they assured me had spoke very wisely to the emperor leopold. i won't trouble you with a catalogue of the rest of the lumber; but i must not forget to mention a small piece of loadstone that held up an anchor of steel too heavy for me to lift. this is what i thought most curious in the whole treasure. there are some few heads of ancient statues; but several of them are defaced by modern additions. i foresee that you will be very little satisfied with this letter, and i dare hardly ask you to be good-natured enough to charge the dulness (sic) of it on the barrenness of the subject, and to overlook the stupidity of, your, &c. &c.
i have not time to answer your letter, being in the hurry of preparing for my journey; but, i think, i ought to bid adieu to my friends with the same solemnity as if i was going to mount a breach, at least, if i am to believe the information of the people here, who denounce all sorts of terrors to me; and, indeed, the weather is at present such, as very few ever set out in. i am threatened at the same time, with being frozen to death, buried in the snow, and taken by the tartars, who ravage that part of hungary i am to pass. 'tis true, we shall have a considerable escorte (sic), so that possibly i may be diverted with a new scene, by finding myself in the midst of a battle. how my adventures will conclude, i leave entirely to providence; if comically, you shall hear of them.—pray be so good as to tell mr —— i have received his letter. make him my adieus; if i live, i will answer it. the same compliment to my lady r——.
i did verily intend to write you a long letter from peterwaradin, where i expected to stay three or four days; but the bassa here was in such haste to see us, that he dispatched the courier back (which mr w—— had sent to know the time he would send the convoy to meet us) without suffering him to pull off his boots. my letters were not thought important enough to stop our journey; and we left peterwaradin the next day, being waited on by the chief officers of the garrison, and a considerable convoy of germans and rascians. the emperor has several regiments of these people; but, to say the truth, they are rather plunderers than soldiers; having no pay, and being obliged to furnish their own arms and horses; they rather look like vagabond gypsies, or stout beggars, than regular troops. i cannot forbear speaking a word of this race of creatures, who are very numerous all over hungary. they have a patriarch of their own at grand cairo, and are really of the greek church; but their extreme ignorance gives their priests occasion to impose several new notions upon them. these fellows, letting their hair and beard grow inviolate, make exactly the figure of the indian bramins (sic). they are heirs-general to all the money of the laity; for which, in return, they give them formal passports signed and sealed for heaven; and the wives and children only inherit the house and cattle. in most other points they follow the greek church.—this little digression has interrupted my telling you we passed over the fields of carlowitz, where the last great victory was obtained by prince eugene over the turks. the marks of that glorious bloody day are yet recent, the field being yet strewed with the skulls and carcasses of unburied men, horses, and camels. i could not look, without horror, on such numbers of mangled human bodies, nor without reflecting on the injustice of war, that makes murder not only necessary but meritorious. nothing seems to be a plainer proof of the irrationality of mankind (whatever fine claims we pretend to reason) than the rage with which they contest for a small spot of ground, when such vast parts of fruitful earth lie quite uninhabited. 'tis true, custom has now made it unavoidable; but can there be a greater demonstration of want of reason, than a custom being firmly established, so plainly contrary to the interest of man in general? i am a good deal inclined to believe mr hobbs, that the state of nature is a state of war; but thence i conclude human nature, not rational, if the word reason means common sense, as i suppose it does. i have a great many admirable arguments to support this refection; i won't however trouble you with them, but return, in a plain style, to the history of my travels.
we were met at betsko (a village in the midway between belgrade and peterwaradin) by an aga of the janizaries, with a body of turks, exceeding the germans by one hundred men, though the bassa had engaged to send exactly the same number. you may judge by this of their fears. i am really persuaded, that they hardly thought the odds of one hundred men set them even with the germans; however, i was very uneasy till they were parted, fearing some quarrel might arise, notwithstanding the parole given. we came late to belgrade, the deep snows making the ascent to it very difficult. it seems a strong city, fortified on the east side by the danube; and on the south by the river save, and was formerly the barrier of hungary. it was first taken by solyman the magnificent, and since by the emperor's forces, led by the elector of bavaria. the emperor held it only two years, it being retaken by the grand vizier. it is now fortified with the utmost care and skill the turks are capable of, and strengthened by a very numerous garrison of their bravest janizaries, commanded by a bassa seraskier (i.e. general) though this last expression is not very just; for, to say truth, the seraskier is commanded by the janizaries. these troops have an absolute authority here, and their conduct carries much more the aspect of rebellion, than the appearance of subordination. you may judge of this by the following story, which, at the same time, will give you an idea of the admirable intelligence of the governor of peterwaradin, though so few hours distant. we were told by him at peterwaradin, that the garrison and inhabitants of belgrade were so weary of the war, they had killed their bassa about two months ago, in a mutiny, because he had suffered himself to be prevailed upon, by a bribe of five purses (five hundred pounds sterling) to give permission to the tartars to ravage the german frontiers. we were very well pleased to hear of such favourable dispositions in the people; but when we came hither, we found the governor had been ill-informed, and the real truth of the story to be this. the late bassa fell under the displeasure of his soldiers; for no other reason, but restraining their incursions on the germans. they took it into their heads, from that mildness, that he had intelligence with the enemy, and sent such information to the grand signior at adrianople; but, redress not coming quick enough from thence, they assembled themselves in a tumultuous manner, and by force dragged their bassa before the cadi and mufti, and there demanded justice in a mutinous way; one crying out, why he protected the infidels? another, why he squeezed them of their money? the bassa easily guessing their purpose, calmly replied to them, that they asked him too many questions, and that he had but one life, which must answer for all. they then immediately fell upon him with their scimitars (without waiting the sentence of their heads of the law) and in a few moments cut him in pieces. the present bassa has not dared to punish the murder; on the contrary, he affected to applaud the actors of it, as brave fellows, that knew to do themselves justice. he takes all pretences of throwing money among the garrison, and suffers them to make little excursions into hungary, where they burn some poor rascian houses.
you may imagine, i cannot be very easy in a town which is really under the government of an insolent soldiery.—we expected to be immediately dismissed, after a night's lodging here, but the bassa detains us till he receives orders from adrianople, which may, possibly be a month a-coming. in the mean time, we are lodged in one of the best houses, belonging to a very considerable man amongst them, and have a whole chamber of janizaries to guard us. my only diversion is the conversation of our host, achmet beg, a title something like that of count in germany. his father was a great bassa, and he has been educated in the most polite eastern learning, being perfectly skilled in the arabic and persian languages, and an extraordinary scribe, which they call effendi. this accomplishment makes way to the greatest preferments; but he has had the good sense to prefer an easy, quiet, secure life, to all the dangerous honours of the porte. he sups with us every night, and drinks wine very freely. you cannot imagine how much he is delighted with the liberty of conversing with me. he has explained to me many pieces of arabian poetry, which, i observe, are in numbers not unlike ours, generally of an alternate verse, and of a very musical sound. their expressions of love are very passionate and lively. i am so much pleased with them, i really believe i should learn to read arabic, if i was to stay here a few months. he has a very good library of their books of all kinds; and, as he tells me, spends the greatest part of his life there. i pass for a great scholar with him, by relating to him some of the persian tales, which i find are genuine. at first he believed i understood persian. i have frequent disputes with him concerning the difference of our customs, particularly the confinement of women. he assures me, there is nothing at all in it; only, says he, we have the advantage, that when our wives cheat us, nobody knows it. he has wit, and is more polite than many christian men of quality. i am very much entertained with him.—he has had the curiosity to make one of our servants set him an alphabet of our letters, and can already write a good roman hand. but these amusements do not hinder my wishing heartily to be out of this place; though the weather is colder than i believe it ever was, any where, but in greenland.—we have a very large stove constantly kept hot, and yet the windows of the room are frozen on the inside.—god knows when i may have an opportunity of sending this letter: but i have written it, for the discharge of my own conscience and you cannot now reproach me, that one of yours makes ten of mine. adieu.
you see i am very exact in keeping the promise you engaged me to make. i know not, however, whether your curiosity will be satisfied with the accounts i shall give you, though i can assure you, the desire i have to oblige you to the utmost of my power, has made me very diligent in my enquiries and observations. 'tis certain we have but very imperfect accounts of the manners and religion of these people; this part of the world being seldom visited, but by merchants, who mind little but their own affairs; or travellers, who make too short a stay, to be able to report any thing exactly of their own knowledge. the turks are too proud to converse familiarly with merchants, who can only pick up some confused informations, which are generally false; and can give no better account of the ways here, than a french refugee, lodging in a garret in greek-street, could write of the court of england. the journey we have made from belgrade hither, cannot possibly be passed by any out of a public character. the desert woods of servia, are the common refuge of thieves, who rob fifty in a company, so that we had need of all our guards to secure us; and the villages are so poor, that only force could extort from them necessary provisions. indeed the janizaries had no mercy on their poverty, killing all the poultry and sheep they could find, without asking to whom they belonged; while the wretched owners durst not put in their claim, for fear of being beaten. lambs just fallen, geese and turkies (sic) big with egg, all massacred without distinction! i fancied i heard the complaints of melibeus for the hope of his flock. when the bassas travel, 'tis yet worse. these oppressors are not content with eating all that is to be eaten belonging to the peasants; after they have crammed themselves and their numerous retinue, they have the impudence to exact what they call teeth-money, a contribution for the use of their teeth, worn with doing them the honour of devouring their meat. this is literally and exactly true, however extravagant it may seem; and such is the natural corruption of a military government, their religion not allowing of this barbarity, any more than ours does.
i had the advantage of lodging three weeks at belgrade, with a principal effendi, that is to say a scholar. this set of men are equally capable of preferments in the law or the church, these two sciences being cast into one, and a lawyer and a priest being the same word in the turkish language. they are the only men really considerable in the empire; all the profitable employments and church revenues are in their hands. the grand signior, though general heir to his people, never presumes to touch their lands or money, which go, in an uninterrupted succession, to their children. 'tis true, they lose this privilege, by accepting a place at court, or the title of bassa; but there are few examples of such fools among them. you may easily judge of the power of these men, who have engrossed all the learning, and almost all the wealth of the empire. 'tis they that are the real authors, though the soldiers are the actors of revolutions. they deposed the late sultan mustapha; and their power is so well known, that 'tis the emperor's interest to flatter them.
this is a long digression. i was going to tell you, that an intimate daily conversation with the effendi achmet-beg, gave me an opportunity of knowing their religion and morals in a more particular manner than perhaps any christian ever did. i explained to him the difference between the religion of england and rome; and he was pleased to hear there were christians that did not worship images, or adore the virgin mary. the ridicule of transubstantiation appeared very strong to him.—upon comparing our creeds together, i am convinced that if our friend dr —— had free liberty of preaching here, it would be very easy to persuade the generality to christianity, whose notions are very little different from his. mr whiston would make a very good apostle here. i don't doubt but his zeal will be much fired, if you communicate this account to him; but tell him, he must first have the gift of tongues, before he can possibly be of any use.—mahometism (sic) is divided into as many sects as christianity; and the first institution as much neglected and obscured by interpretations. i cannot here forbear reflecting on the natural inclination of mankind, to make mysteries and novelties.—the zeidi, kudi, jabari, &c. put me in mind of the catholics, lutherans, and calvinists, and are equally zealous against one another. but the most prevailing opinion, if you search into the secret of the effendis, is, plain deism. this is indeed kept from the people, who are amused with a thousand different notions, according to the different interest of their preachers.—there are very few amongst them (achmet-beg denied there were any) so absurd, as to set up for wit, by declaring they believe no god at all. and sir paul rycaut is mistaken (as he commonly is) in calling the sect muterin, (i. e. the secret with us) atheists, they being deists, whose impiety consists in making a jest of their prophet. achmet-beg did not own to me that he was of this opinion; but made no scruple of deviating from some part of mahomet's law, by drinking wine with the same freedom we did. when i asked him how he came to allow himself that liberty? he made answer, that all the creatures of god are good, and designed for the use of man; however, that the prohibition of wine was a very wise maxim, and meant for the common people, being the source of all disorders amongst them; but, that the prophet never designed to confine those that knew how to use it with moderation; nevertheless, he said, that scandal ought to be avoided, and that he never drank it in public. this is the general way of thinking amongst them, and very few forbear drinking wine that are able to afford it. he assured me, that if i understood arabic, i should be very well pleased with reading the alcoran, which is so far from the nonsense we charge it with, that it is the purest morality, delivered in the very best language. i have since heard impartial christians speak of it in the same manner; and i don't doubt but that all our translations are from copies got from the greek priests, who would not fail to falsify it with the extremity of malice. no body of men ever were more ignorant, or more corrupt; yet they differ so little from the romish church, that, i confess, nothing gives me a greater abhorrence of the cruelty of your clergy, than the barbarous persecution of them, whenever they have been their masters, for no other reason than their not acknowledging the pope. the dissenting in that one article, has got them the titles of heretics and schismatics; and, what is worse, the same treatment. i found at philippopolis, a sect of christians that call themselves paulines. they shew an old church, where, they say, st paul preached; and he is their favourite saint, after the same manner that st peter is at rome; neither do they forget to give him the same preference over the rest of the apostles.
but of all the religions i have seen, that of the arnounts seems to me the most particular; they are natives of arnountlich, the ancient macedonia, and still retain the courage and hardiness, though they have lost the name of macedonians, being the best militia in the turkish empire, and the only check upon the janizaries. they are foot soldiers; we had a guard of them, relieved in every considerable town we passed; they are all cloathed and armed at their own expence, dressed in clean white coarse cloth, carrying guns of a prodigious length, which they run with upon their shoulders, as if they did not feel the weight of them, the leader singing a sort of rude tune, not unpleasant, and the rest making up the chorus. these people living between christians and mahometans, and not being skilled in controversy, declare, that they are utterly unable to judge which religion is best; but, to be certain of not entirely rejecting the truth, they very prudently follow both. they go to the mosques on fridays, and to the church on sunday, saying, for their excuse, that at the day of judgment they are sure of protection from the true prophet; but which that is, they are not able to determine in this world. i believe there is no other race of mankind, who have so modest an opinion of their own capacity.
these are the remarks i have made, on the diversity of religions i have seen. i don't ask your pardon for the liberty i have taken in speaking of the roman. i know you equally condemn the quakery (sic) of all churches, as much as you revere the sacred truths, in which we both agree.
you will expect i should say something to you of the antiquities of this country; but there are few remains of ancient greece. we passed near the piece of an arch, which is commonly called trajan's gate, from a supposition, that he made it to shut up the passage over the mountains, between sophia and philippopolis. but i rather believe it the remains of some triumphal arch, (tho' i could not see any inscription;) for if that passage had been shut up, there are many others that would serve for the march of an army; and, notwithstanding the story of baldwin earl of flanders being overthrown in these straits, after he won constantinople, i don't fancy the germans would find themselves stopped by them at this day. 'tis true, the road is now made (with great industry) as commodious as possible, for the march of the turkish army; there is not one ditch or puddle between this place and belgrade, that has not a large strong bridge of planks built over it; but the precipices are not so terrible as i had heard them represented. at these mountains we lay at the little village kiskoi, wholly inhabited by christians, as all the peasants of bulgaria are. their houses are nothing but little huts, raised of dirt baked in the sun; and they leave them and fly into the mountains, some months before the march of the turkish army, who would else entirely ruin them, by driving away their whole flocks. this precaution secures them in a sort of plenty; for such vast tracts of land lying in common, they have the liberty of sowing what they please, and are generally very industrious husbandmen. i drank here several sorts of delicious wine. the women dress themselves in a great variety of coloured glass beads, and are not ugly, but of a tawny complexion. i have now told you all that is worth telling you, and perhaps more, relating to my journey. when i am at constantinople, i'll try to pick up some curiosities, and then you shall hear again from your's, &c.
i dare say you expect, at least, something very new in this letter, after i have gone a journey, not undertaken by any christian for some hundred years. the most remarkable accident that happened to me, was my being very near overturned into the hebrus; and, if i had much regard for the glories that one's name enjoys after death, i should certainly be sorry for having missed the romantic conclusion of swimming down the same river in which the musical head of orpheus repeated verses so many ages since:
                   "caput a cervice revulsum,
         "gurgite cum medio, portans oeagrius hebrus,
         "volveret, eurydicen vox ipsa, et frigida lingua,
         "ah! miseram eurydicen! anima fugiente vocabat,
         "eurydicen toto referebant flumine ripae"
who knows but some of your bright wits might have found it a subject affording many poetical turns, and have told the world, in an heroic elegy, that,
as equal were our souls, so equal were our fates?
i despair of ever hearing so many fine things said of me, as so extraordinary a death would have given occasion for.
i am at this present moment writing in a house situated on the banks of the hebrus, which runs under my chamber window. my garden is full of all cypress trees, upon the branches of which several couple of true turtles are saying soft things to one another from morning till night. how naturally do boughs and vows come into my mind, at this minute? and must not you confess, to my praise, that 'tis more than an ordinary discretion that can resist the wicked suggestions of poetry, in a place where truth, for once, furnishes all the ideas of pastoral. the summer is already far advanced in this part of the world; and, for some miles round adrianople, the whole ground is laid out in gardens, and the banks of the rivers are set with rows of fruit-trees, under which all the most considerable turks divert themselves every evening, not with walking, that is not one of their pleasures; but a set party of them chuse out a green spot, where the shade is very thick, and, there they spread a carpet, on which they sit drinking their coffee, and are generally attended by some slave with a fine voice, or that plays on some instrument. every twenty paces you may see one of these little companies listening to the dashing of the river; and this taste is so universal, that the very gardeners are not without it. i have often seen them and their children sitting on the banks of the river, and playing on a rural instrument, perfectly answering the description of the ancient fistula, being composed of unequal reeds, with a simple, but agreeable softness in the sound.
mr addison might here make the experiment he speaks of in his travels; there not being one instrument of music among the greek or roman statues, that is not to be found in the hands of the people of this country. the young lads generally divert themselves with making garlands for their favourite lambs, which i have often seen painted and adorned with flowers, lying at their feet, while they sung or played. it is not that they ever read romances, but these are the ancient amusements here, and as natural to them as cudgel-playing and foot-ball to our british swains; the softness and warmth of the climate forbidding all rough exercises, which were never so much as heard of amongst them, and naturally inspiring a laziness and aversion to labour, which the great plenty indulges. these gardeners are the only happy race of country people in turkey. they furnish all the city with fruits and herbs, and seem to live very easily. they are most of them greeks, and have little houses in the midst of their gardens, where their wives and daughters take a liberty, not permitted in the town, i mean, to go unveiled. these wenches are very neat and handsome, and pass their time at their looms, under the shade of the trees.
i no longer look upon theocritus as a romantic writer; he has only given a plain image of the way of life amongst the peasants of his country; who, before oppression had reduced them to want, were, i suppose, all employed as the better sort of them are now. i don't doubt, had he been born a briton, but his idyliums had been filled with descriptions of threshing and churning, both which are unknown here, the corn being all trode (sic) out by oxen; and butter (i speak it with sorrow) unheard of.
i read over your homer here, with an infinite pleasure, and find several little passages explained, that i did not before entirely comprehend the beauty of; many of the customs, and much of the dress then in fashion, being yet retained. i don't wonder to find more remains here, of an age so distant, than is to be found in any other country, the turks not taking that pains to introduce their own manners, as has been generally practised by other nations, that imagine themselves more polite. it would be too tedious to you, to point out all the passages that relate to present customs. but, i can assure you, that the princesses and great ladies pass their time at their looms, embroidering veils and robes, surrounded by their maids, which are always very numerous, in the same manner as we find andromache and helen described. the description of the belt of menelaus, exactly resembles those that are now worn by the great men, fastened before with broad golden clasps, and embroidered round with rich work. the snowy veil that helen throws over her face, is still fashionable; and i never see half a dozen of old bashaws (as i do very often) with their reverend beards, sitting basking in the sun, but i recollect good king priam and his counsellors. their manner of dancing is certainly the same that diana is sung (sic) to have danced on the banks of eurotas. the great lady still leads the dance, and is followed by a troop of young girls, who imitate her steps, and, if she sings, make up the chorus. the tunes are extremely gay and lively, yet with something in them wonderfully soft. the steps are varied according to the pleasure of her that leads the dance, but always in exact time, and infinitely more agreeable than any of our dances, at least in my opinion. i sometimes make one in the train, but am not skilful enough to lead; these are the grecian dances, the turkish being very different.
i should have told you, in the first place, that the eastern manners give a great light into many scripture-passages, that appear odd to us, their phrases being commonly what we should call scripture-language. the vulgar turk is very different from what is spoke at court, or amongst the people of figure; who always mix so much arabic and persian in their discourse, that it may very well be called another language. and 'tis as ridiculous to make use of the expressions commonly used, in speaking to a great man or lady, as it would be to speak broad yorkshire, or somersetshire, in the drawing room. besides this distinction, they have what they call the sublime, that is, a style proper for poetry, and which is the exact scripture style. i believe you will be pleased to see a genuine example of this; and i am very glad i have it in my power to satisfy your curiosity, by sending you a faithful copy of the verses that ibrahim bassa, the reigning favourite, has made for the young princess, his contracted wife, whom he is not yet permitted to visit without witnesses, though she is gone home to his house. he is a man of wit and learning; and whether or no he is capable of writing good verse, you may be sure, that, on such an occasion, he would not want the assistance of the best poets in the empire. thus the verses may be looked upon as a sample of their finest poetry; and i don't doubt you'll be of my mind, that it is most wonderfully resembling the song of solomon, which was also addressed to a royal bride.
i have taken abundance of pains to get these verses in a literal translation; and if you were acquainted with my interpreters, i might spare myself the trouble of assuring you, that they have received no poetical touches from their hands. in my opinion (allowing for the inevitable faults of a prose translation into a language so very different) there is a good deal of beauty in them. the epithet of stag-ey'd (though the sound is not very agreeable in english) pleases me extremely; and i think it a very lively image of the fire and indifference in his mistress's eyes.—monsieur boileau has very justly observed, that we are never to judge of the elevation of an expression in an ancient author, by the sound it carries with us; since it may be extremely fine with them, when, at the same time, it appears low or uncouth to us. you are so well acquainted with homer, you cannot but have observed the same thing, and you must have the same indulgence for all oriental poetry. the repetitions at the end of the two first stanzas are meant for a sort of chorus, and are agreeable to the ancient manner of writing. the music of the verses apparently changes in the third stanza, where the burden is altered; and i think he very artfully, seems more passionate at the conclusion, as 'tis natural for people to warm themselves by their own discourse, especially on a subject in which one is deeply concerned; 'tis certainly far more touching than our modern custom of concluding a song of passion with a turn which is inconsistent with it. the first verse is a description of the season of the year; all the country now being full of nightingales, whole amours with roses, is an arabian fable, as well known here as any part of ovid amongst us, and is much the same as if an english poem should begin, by saying,—"now philomela sings." or what if i turned the whole into the style of english poetry, to see how it would look?
i have taken the liberty, in the second verse, of following what i suppose the true sense of the author, though not literally expressed. by his saying, he went down to admire the beauty of the vines, and her charms ravished his soul, i understand a poetical fiction, of having first seen her in a garden, where he was admiring the beauty of the spring. but i could not forbear retaining the comparison of her eyes with those of a stag, though perhaps the novelty of it may give it a burlesque sound in our language. i cannot determine upon the whole, how well i have succeeded in the translation, neither do i think our english proper to express such violence of passion, which is very seldom felt amongst us. we want also those compound words which are very frequent and strong in the turkish language.
you see i am pretty far gone in oriental learning; and, to say truth, i study very hard. i wish my studies may give me an occasion of entertaining your curiosity, which will be the utmost advantage hoped for from them, by, your's, &c.
i am going to leave adrianople, and i would not do it without giving you some account of all that is curious in it, which i have taken a great deal of pains to see. i will not trouble you with wise dissertations, whether or no this is the same city that was anciently called orestesit or oreste, which you know better than i do. it is now called from the emperor adrian, and was the first european seat of the turkish empire, and has been the favourite residence of many sultans. mahomet the fourth, and mustapha, the brother of the reigning emperor, were so fond of it, that they wholly abandoned constantinople; which humour so far exasperated the janizaries, that it was a considerable motive to the rebellions that deposed them. yet this man seems to love to keep his court here. i can give you no reason for this partiality. 'tis true, the situation is fine, and the country all round very beautiful; but the air is extremely bad, and the seraglio itself is not free from the ill effect of it. the town is said to be eight miles in compass, i suppose they reckon in the gardens. there are some good houses in it, i mean large ones; for the architecture of their palaces never makes any great shew. it is now very full of people; but they are most of them such as follow the court, or camp; and when they are removed, i am told, 'tis no populous city. the river maritza (anciently the hebrus) on which it is situated, is dried up every summer, which contributes very much to make it unwholesome. it is now a very pleasant stream. there are two noble bridges built over it. i had the curiosity to go to see the exchange in my turkish dress, which is disguise sufficient. yet i own, i was not very easy when i saw it crowded with janizaries; but they dare not be rude to a woman, and made way for me with as much respect as if i had been in my own figure. it is half a mile in length, the roof arched, and kept extremely neat. it holds three hundred and sixty-five shops, furnished with all sorts of rich goods, exposed to sale in the same manner as at the new exchange in london. but the pavement is kept much neater; and the shops are all so clean, they seem just new painted.—idle people of all sorts walk here for their diversion, or amuse themselves with drinking coffee, or sherbet, which is cried about as oranges and sweet-meats are in our play-houses. i observed most of the rich tradesmen were jews. that people are in incredible power in this country. they have many privileges above all the natural turks themselves, and have formed a very considerable commonwealth here, being judged by their own laws. they have drawn the whole trade of the empire into their hands, partly by the firm union amongst themselves, and partly by the idle temper and want of industry in the turks. every bassa has his jew, who is his homme d'affaires; he is let into all his secrets, and does all his business. no bargain is made, no bribe received, no merchandise disposed of, but what passes through their hands. they are the physicians, the stewards, and the interpreters of all the great men. you may judge how advantageous this is to a people who never fail to make use of the smallest advantages. they have found the secret of making themselves so necessary, that they are certain of the protection of the court, whatever ministry is in power. even the english, french, and italian merchants, who are sensible of their artifices, are, however, forced to trust their affairs to their negotiation, nothing of trade being managed without them, and the meanest amongst them being too important to be disobliged, since the whole body take care of his interests, with as much vigour as they would those of the most considerable of their members. they are many of them vastly rich, but take care to make little public shew of it, though they live in their houses in the utmost luxury and magnificence. this copious subject has drawn me from my description of the exchange, founded by ali bassa, whose name it bears. near it is the sherski, a street of a mile in length, full of shops of all kind of fine merchandise, but excessive dear, nothing being made here. it is covered on the top with boards, to keep out the rain, that merchants may meet conveniently in all weathers. the besiten near it, is another exchange, built upon pillars, where all sorts of horse-furniture is sold: glittering every where with gold, rich embroidery, and jewels, it makes a very agreeable shew. from this place i went, in my turkish coach, to the camp, which is to move in a few days to the frontiers. the sultan is already gone to his tents, and all his court; the appearance of them is, indeed, very magnificent. those of the great men are rather like palaces than tents, taking up a great compass of ground, and being divided into a vast number of apartments. they are all of green, and the bassas of three tails, have those ensigns of their power placed in very conspicuous manner before their tents, which are adorned on the top with gilded balls, more or less, according to their different ranks. the ladies go in coaches to see the camp, as eagerly, as ours did to that of hyde-park; but 'tis very easy to observe, that the soldiers do not begin the campaign with any great cheerfulness. the war is a general grievance upon the people, but particularly hard upon the tradesmen, now that the grand signior is resolved to lead his army in person. every company of them is obliged, upon this occasion, to make a present according to their ability.
i took the pains of rising at six in the morning to see the ceremony which did not, however, begin till eight. the grand signior was at the seraglio window, to see the procession, which passed through the principal streets. it was preceded by an effendi, mounted on a camel, richly furnished, reading aloud the alcoran, finely bound, laid upon a cushion. he was surrounded by a parcel of boys, in white, singing some verses of it, followed by a man dressed in green boughs, representing a clean husbandman sowing seed. after him several reapers, with garlands of ears of corn, as ceres is pictured, with scythes in their hands, seeming to mow. then a little machine drawn by oxen, in which was a wind-mill, and boys employed in grinding corn, followed by another machine, drawn by buffaloes, carrying an oven, and two more boys, one employed in kneading the bread, and another in drawing it out of the oven. these boys threw little cakes on both sides amongst the crowd, and were followed by the whole company of bakers, marching on foot, two by two, in their best clothes, with cakes, loaves, pasties, and pies of all sorts on their heads, and after them two buffoons, or jack-puddings, with their faces and clothes smeared with meal, who diverted the mob with their antic gestures. in the same manner followed all the companies of trade in the empire; the nobler sort, such as jewellers, mercers, &c. finely mounted, and many of the pageants that represent their trades, perfectly magnificent; amongst which, that of the furriers made one of the best figures, being a very large machine, set round with the skins of ermines, foxes, &c. so well stuffed, that the animals seemed to be alive, and followed by music and dancers. i believe they were, upon the whole, twenty thousand men, all ready to follow his highness, if he commanded them. the rear was closed by the volunteers, who came to beg the honour of dying in his service. this part of the shew seemed to me so barbarous, that i removed from the window upon the first appearance of it. they were all naked to the middle. some had their arms pierced through with arrows, left sticking in them. others had them sticking in their heads, the blood trickling down their faces. some slashed their arms with sharp knives, making the blood spring out upon those that stood there; and this is looked upon as an expression of their zeal for glory. i am told that some make use of it to advance their love; and, when they are near the window where their mistress stands, (all the women in town being veiled to see this spectacle) they stick another arrow for her sake, who gives some sign of approbation and encouragement to this gallantry. the whole shew lasted for near eight hours, to my great sorrow, who was heartily tired, though i was in the house of the widow of the captain bassa (admiral) who refreshed me with coffee, sweetmeats, sherbet, &c. with all possible civility.
i went two days after, to see, the mosque of sultan selim i. which is a building very well worth the curiosity of a traveller. i was, dressed in my turkish habit, and admitted without scruple; though i believe they guessed who i was, by the extreme officiousness of the door-keeper, to shew me every part of it. it is situated very advantageously in the midst of the city, and in the highest part of it, making a very noble show. the first court has four gates, and the innermost three. they are both of them surrounded with cloisters, with marble pillars of the ionic order, finely polished, and of very lively colours; the whole pavement is of white marble, and the roof of the cloisters divided into several cupolas or domes, headed with gilt balls on the top. in the midst of each court, are fine fountains of white marble; and, before the great gate of the mosque, a portico, with green marble pillars, which has five gates, the body of the mosque being one prodigious dome. i understand so little of architecture, i dare not pretend to speak of the proportions. it seemed to me very regular, this i am sure of, it is vastly high, and i thought it the noblest building i ever saw. it has two rows of marble galleries on pillars, with marble balusters; the pavement is also marble, covered with persian carpets. in my opinion, it is a great addition to its beauty, that it is not divided into pews, and incumbered with forms and benches like our churches; nor the pillars (which are most of them red and white marble) disfigured by the little tawdry images and pictures, that give roman-catholic churches the air of toy-shops. the walls seemed to be inlaid with such very lively colours, in small flowers, that i could not imagine what stones had been made use of. but going nearer, i saw they were crusted with japan china, which has a very beautiful effect. in the midst hung a vast lamp of silver, gilt; besides which, i do verily believe, there were at least two thousand of a lesser size. this must look very glorious, when they are all lighted; but being at night, no women are suffered to enter. under the large lamp is a great pulpit of carved wood, gilt; and just by, a fountain to wash, which, you know, is an essential part of their devotion. in one corner is a little gallery, inclosed with gilded lattices, for the grand-signior. at the upper end, a large niche, very like an altar, raised two steps, covered with gold brocade, and standing before it, two silver gilt candlesticks, the height of a man, and in them white wax candles, as thick as a man's waist. the outside of the mosque is adorned with towers, vastly high, gilt on the top, from whence the imaums (sic) call the people to prayers. i had the curiosity to go up one of them, which is contrived so artfully, as to give surprise to all that see it. there is but one door, which leads to three different stair-cases, going to the three different stories of the tower, in such a manner, that three priests may ascend, rounding, without ever meeting each other; a contrivance very much admired. behind the mosque, is an exchange full of shops, where poor artificers are lodged gratis. i saw several dervises (sic) at their prayers here. they are dressed in a plain piece of woolen, with their arms bare, and a woolen cap on their heads, like a high crowned hat without brims. i went to see some other mosques, built much after the same manner, but not comparable in point of magnificence to this i have described, which is infinitely beyond any church in germany or england; i won't talk of other countries i have not seen. the seraglio does not seem a very magnificent palace. but the gardens are very large, plentifully supplied with water, and full of trees; which is all i know of them, having never been in them.
i tell you nothing of the order of mr w——'s entry, and his audience. these things are always the same, and have been so often described, i won't trouble you with the repetition. the young prince, about eleven years old, sits near his father, when he gives audience: he is a handsome boy; but, probably, will not immediately succeed the sultan, there being two sons of sultan mustapha (his eldest brother) remaining; the eldest about twenty years old, on whom the hopes of the people are fixed. this reign has been bloody and avaricious. i am apt to believe, they are very impatient to see the end of it. i am, sir, yours, &c. &c.
p. s. i will write to you again from constantinople.
i have had the advantage of very fine weather, all my journey; and as the summer is now in its beauty, i enjoyed the pleasure of fine prospects; and the meadows being full of all sorts of garden flowers, and sweet herbs, my berlin perfumed the air as it pressed them. the grand signior furnished us with thirty covered waggons for our baggage, and five coaches of the country for my women. we found the road full of the great spahis and their equipages coming out of asia to the war. they always travel with tents; but i chose to ly in houses all the way. i will not trouble you with the names of the villages we passed, in which there was nothing remarkable, but at ciorlei, where there was a conac, or little seraglio, built for the use of the grand signior, when he goes this road. i had the curiosity to view all the apartments destined for the ladies of his court. they were in the midst of a thick grove of trees, made fresh by fountains; but i was most surprised to see the walls almost covered with little distiches of turkish verse, wrote with pencils. i made my interpreter explain them to me, and i found several of them very well turned; though i easily believed him, that they had lost much of their beauty in the translation. one was literally thus in english:
we come into this world; we lodge, and we depart; he never goes, that's lodged within my heart.
the rest of our journey was through fine painted meadows, by the side of the sea of marmora, the ancient propontis. we lay the next night at selivrea, anciently a noble town. it is now a good sea-port, and neatly built enough, and has a bridge of thirty-two arches. here is a famous ancient greek church. i had given one of my coaches to a greek lady, who desired the conveniency of travelling with me; she designed to pay her devotions, and i was glad of the opportunity of going with her. i found it an ill-built edifice, set out with the same sort of ornaments, but less rich, as the roman-catholic churches. they shewed me a saint's body, where i threw a piece of money; and a picture of the virgin mary, drawn by the hand of st luke, very little to the credit of his painting; but, however, the finest madona (sic) of italy, is not more famous for her miracles. the greeks have a monstrous taste in their pictures, which, for more finery, are always drawn upon a gold ground. you may imagine what a good air this has; but they have no notion, either of shade or proportion. they have a bishop here, who officiated in his purple robe, and sent me a candle almost as big as myself for a present, when i was at my lodging. we lay that night at a town called bujuk cekmege, or great bridge; and the night following, at kujuk cekmege, or little bridge; in a very pleasant lodging, formerly a monastery of dervises; having before it a large court, encompassed with marble cloisters, with a good fountain in the middle. the prospect from this place, and the gardens round it, is the most agreeable i have seen; and shews, that monks of all religions know how to chuse their retirements. 'tis now belonging to a hogia or schoolmaster, who teaches boys here. i asked him to shew me his own apartment, and was surprised to see him point to a tall cypress tree in the garden, on the top of which was a place for a bed for himself, and a little lower, one for his wife and two children, who slept there every night. i was so much diverted with the fancy, i resolved to examine his nest nearer; but after going up fifty steps, i found i had still fifty to go up, and then i must climb from branch to branch, with some hazard of my neck. i thought it therefore the best way to come down again.
we arrived the next day at constantinople; but i can yet tell you very little of it, all my time having been taken up with receiving visits, which are, at least, a very good entertainment to the eyes, the young women being all beauties, and their beauty highly improved by the high taste of their dress. our palace is in pera, which is no more a suburb of constantinople, than westminster is a suburb to london. all the ambassadors are lodged very near each other. one part of our house shews us the port, the city, and the seraglio, and the distant hills of asia; perhaps, all together, the most beautiful prospect in the world.
a certain french author says, constantinople is twice as big as paris. mr w——y is unwilling to own 'tis bigger than london, though i confess it appears to me to be so; but i don't believe it is so populous. the burying fields about it are certainly much larger than the whole city. 'tis surprising what a vast deal of land is lost this way in turkey. sometimes i have seen burying places of several miles, belonging to very inconsiderable villages, which were formerly great towns, and retain no other mark of their ancient grandeur, than this dismal one. on no occasion do they ever remove a stone that serves for a monument. some of them are costly enough, being of very fine marble. they set up a pillar, with a carved turbant on the top of it, to the memory of a man; and as the turbants, by their different shapes, shew the quality or profession, 'tis in a manner putting up the arms of the deceased; besides, the pillar commonly bears an inscription in gold letters. the ladies have a simple pillar without other ornament, except those that die unmarried, who have a rose on the top of their monument. the sepulchres of particular families are railed in, and planted round with trees. those of the sultans, and some great men, have lamps constantly burning in them.
when i spoke of their religion, i forgot to mention two particularities, one of which i have read of, but it seemed so odd to me, i could not believe it; yet 'tis certainly true; that when a man has divorced his wife, in the most solemn manner, he can take her again, upon no other terms, than permitting another man to pass a night with her; and there are some examples of those who have submitted to this law, rather than not have back their beloved. the other point of doctrine is very extraordinary. any woman that dies unmarried is looked upon to die in a state of reprobation. to confirm this belief, they reason, that the end of the creation of woman is to increase and multiply; and that she is only properly employed in the works of her calling, when she is bringing forth children, or taking care of them, which are all the virtues that god expects from her. and indeed, their way of life, which shuts them out of all public commerce, does not permit them any other. our vulgar notion, that they don't own women to have any souls, is a mistake. 'tis true, they say, they are not of so elevated a kind, and therefore must not hope to be admitted into the paradise appointed for the men, who are to be entertained by celestial beauties. but there is a place of happiness destined for souls of the inferior order, where all good women are to be in eternal bliss. many of them are very superstitious, and will not remain widows ten days, for fear of dying in the reprobate state of an useless creature. but those that like their liberty, and are not slaves to their religion, content themselves with marrying when they are afraid of dying. this is a piece of theology, very different from that which teaches nothing to be more acceptable to god than a vow of perpetual virginity: which divinity is most rational, i leave you to determine.
i have already made some progress in a collection of greek medals. here are several professed antiquaries, who are ready to serve any body that desires them. but you cannot imagine how they stare in my face, when i enquire about them, as if no body was permitted to seek after medals, till they were grown a piece of antiquity themselves. i have got some very valuable ones of the macedonian kings, particularly one of perseus, so lively, i fancy i can see all his ill qualities in his face. i have a prophyry (sic) head finely cut, of the true greek sculpture; but who it represents, is to be guessed at by the learned when i return. for you are not to suppose these antiquaries (who are all greeks) know any thing. their trade is only to sell; they have correspondents at aleppo, grand cairo, in arabia and palestine, who send them all they can find, and very often great heaps, that are only fit to melt into pans and kettles. they get the best price they can for them, without knowing those that are valuable from those that are not. those that pretend to skill, generally find out the image of some saint in the medals of the greek cities. one of them, shewing me the figure of a pallas, with a victory in her hand on a reverse, assured me, it was the virgin, holding a crucifix. the same man offered me the head of a socrates, on a sardonyx; and, to enhance the value, gave him the title of saint augustine. i have bespoke a mummy, which i hope will come safe to my hands, notwithstanding the misfortune that befel (sic) a very fine one, designed for the king of sweden. he gave a great price for it, and the turks took it into their heads, that he must have some considerable project depending upon it. they fancied it the body of, god knows who; and that the state of their empire mystically depended on the conversation of it. some old prophecies were remembered upon this occasion, and the mummy committed prisoner to the seven towers, where it has remained under close confinement ever since, i dare not try my interest in so considerable a point, as the release of it; but i hope mine will pass without examination. i can tell you nothing more at present of this famous city. when i have looked a little about me, you shall hear from me again. i am, sir, your's, &c. &c.
i hope, before this time, you have received two or three of my letters. i had yours but yesterday, though dated the third of february, in which you suppose me to be dead and buried. i have already let you know, that i am still alive; but to say truth, i look upon my present circumstances to be exactly the same with those of departed spirits. the heats of constantinople have driven me to this place, which perfectly answers the description of the elysian fields. i am in the middle of a wood, consisting chiefly of fruit-trees, watered by a vast number of fountains, famous for the excellency of their water, and divided into many shady walks, upon short grass, that seems to me artificial, but, i am assured, is the pure work of nature—within view of the black sea, from whence we perpetually enjoy the refreshment of cool breezes, that make us insensible of the heat of the summer. the village is only inhabited by the richest amongst the christians, who meet every night at a fountain, forty paces from my house, to sing and dance. the beauty and dress of the women exactly resemble the ideas of the ancient nymphs, as they are given us by the representations of the poets and painters. but what persuades me more fully of my decease, is the situation of my own mind, the profound ignorance i am in, of what passes among the living (which only comes to me by chance) and the great calmness with which i receive it. yet i have still a hankering after my friends and acquaintances left in the world, according to the authority of that admirable author,
        that spirits departed are wondrous kind
         to friends and relations left behind:
                               which nobody can deny.
of which solemn truth, i am a dead instance. i think virgil is of the same opinion, that in human souls there will still be some remains of human passions:
—curae non ipsae in morte relinquunt.
and 'tis very necessary, to make a perfect elysium (sic), that there should be a river lethe, which i am not so happy as to find. to say truth, i am sometimes very weary of the singing, and dancing, and sunshine, and wish for the smoke and impertinencies in which you toil; though i endeavour to persuade myself, that i live in a more agreeable variety than you do; and that monday, setting of partridges; tuesday, reading english; wednesday, studying in the turkish language, (in which, by the way, i am already very learned;) thursday, classical authors; friday, spent in writing; saturday, at my needle; and sunday, admitting of visits, and hearing of music, is a better way of disposing of the week; than, monday, at the drawing room; tuesday, lady mohun's; wednesday, at the opera; thursday, the play; friday, mrs chetwynd's, &c. a perpetual round of hearing the same scandal, and seeing the same follies acted over and over, which here affect me no more than they do other dead people. i can now hear of displeasing things with pity, and without indignation. the reflection on the great gulph (sic) between you and me, cools all news that come hither. i can neither be sensibly touched with joy or grief, when i consider, that possibly the cause of either is removed, before the letter comes to my hands. but (as i said before) this indolence does not extend to my few friendships; i am still warmly sensible of yours and mr congreve's, and desire to live in your remembrance, though dead to all the world beside. i am, &c. &c.
i am extremely pleased with hearing from you, and my vanity (the darling frailty of mankind) not a little flattered by the uncommon questions you ask me, though i am utterly incapable of answering them. and, indeed, were i as good a mathematician as euclid himself, it requires an age's stay to make just observations on the air and vapours. i have not been yet a full year here, and am on the point of removing. such is my rambling destiny. this will surprise you, and can surprise no body so much as myself. perhaps you will accuse me of laziness, or dulness (sic), or both together, that can leave this place, without giving you some account of the turkish court. i can only tell you, that if you please to read sir paul rycaut, you will there find a full and true account of the vizier's, the beglerbys, the civil and spiritual government, the officers of the seraglio, &c. things that 'tis very easy to procure lists of, and therefore may be depended on; though other stories, god knows—i say no more—every body is at liberty to write their own remarks; the manners of people may change; or some of them escape the observation of travellers; but 'tis not the same of the government; and, for that reason, since i can tell you nothing new, i will tell you nothing of it. in the same silence shall be passed over the arsenal and seven towers; and for mosques, i have already described one of the noblest to you very particularly. but i cannot forbear taking notice to you of a mistake of gemelli, (though i honour him in a much higher degree than any other voyage-writer:) he says that there are no remains of calcedon; this is certainly a mistake: i was there, yesterday, and went cross the canal in my galley, the sea being very narrow between that city and constantinople. 'tis still a large town, and has several mosques in it. the christians still call it calcedonia, and the turks give it a name i forgot, but which is only a corruption of the same word. i suppose this is an error of his guide, which his short stay hindered him from rectifying, for i have, in other matters, a very just esteem for his veracity. nothing can be pleasanter than the canal; and the turks are so well acquainted with its beauties, that all their pleasure-seats are built on its banks, where they have, at the same time, the most beautiful prospects in europe and asia; there are near one another some hundreds of magnificent palaces. human grandeur being here yet more unstable than any where else, 'tis common for the heirs of a great three-tailed bassa, not to be rich enough to keep in repair the house he built; thus, in a few years, they all fall to ruin. i was yesterday to see that of the late grand vizier, who was killed at peterwaradin. it was built to receive his royal bride, daughter of the present sultan; but he did not live to see her there. i have a great mind to describe it to you; but i check that inclination, knowing very well, that i cannot give you, with my best description, such an idea of it as i ought. it is situated on one of the most delightful parts of the canal, with a fine wood on the side of a hill behind it. the extent of it is prodigious; the guardian assured me, there are eight hundred rooms in it; i will not, however, answer for that number, since i did not count them; but 'tis certain the number is very large, and the whole adorned with a profusion of marble, gilding, and the most exquisite painting of fruit and flowers. the windows are all sashed with the finest crystalline glass brought from england; and here is all the expensive magnificence that you can suppose in a palace founded by a vain luxurious young man, with the wealth of a vast empire at his command. but no part of it pleased me better than the apartments destined for the bagnios. there are two built exactly in the same manner, answering to one another; the baths, fountains, and pavements, all of white marble, the roofs gilt, and the walls covered with japan china. adjoining to them are two rooms, the uppermost of which is divided into a sofa, and in the four corners are falls of water from the very roof, from shell to shell, of white marble, to the lower end of the room, where it falls into a large basin, surrounded with pipes, that throw up the water as high as the roof. the walls are in the nature of lattices; and, on the outside of them, there are vines and woodbines planted, that form a sort of green tapestry, and give an agreeable obscurity to those delightful chambers. i should go on and let you into some of the other apartments (all worthy your curiosity); but 'tis yet harder to describe a turkish palace than any other, being built entirely irregular. there is nothing that can be properly called front or wings; and though such a confusion is, i think, pleasing to the sight, yet it would be very unintelligible in a letter. i shall only add, that the chamber destined for the sultan, when he visits his daughter, is wainscotted with mother of pearl, fastened with emeralds like nails. there are others of mother of pearl and olive wood inlaid, and several of japan china. the galleries, which are numerous, and very large, are adorned with jars of flowers, and porcelain dishes of fruit of all sorts, so well done in plaster, and coloured in so lively a manner, that it has an enchanting effect. the garden is suitable to the house, where arbours, fountains, and walks, are thrown together in an agreeable confusion. there is no ornament wanting, except that of statues. thus, you see, sir, these people are not so unpolished as we represent them. 'tis true, their magnificence is of a very different taste from ours, and perhaps of a better. i am almost of opinion, they have a right notion of life. they consume it in music, gardens, wine, and delicate eating, while we are tormenting our brains with some scheme of politics, or studying some science to which we can never attain; or, if we do, cannot persuade other people to set that value upon it we do ourselves. 'tis certain, what we feel and see is properly (if any thing is properly) our own; but the good of fame, the folly of praise, are hardly purchased, and, when obtained, a poor recompence (sic) for loss of time and health. we die or grow old before we can reap the fruit of our labours. considering what short-liv'd, weak animals men are, is there any study so beneficial as the study of present pleasure? i dare not pursue this theme; perhaps i have already said too much, but i depend upon the true knowledge you have of my heart. i don't expect from you the insipid railleries i should suffer from another in answer to this letter. you know how to divide the idea of pleasure from that of vice, and they are only mingled in the heads of fools.—but i allow you to laugh at me for the sensual declaration in saying, that i had rather be a rich effendi, with all his ignorance, than sir isaac newton with all his knowledge. i am, sir, &c. &c.
i left constantinople the sixth of the last month, and this is the first post from whence i could send a letter, though i have often wished for the opportunity, that i might impart some of the pleasure i found in this voyage, through the most agreeable part of the world, where every scene presents me some poetical idea,
         warm'd with poetic transport i survey
          th' immortal islands, and the well known sea.
          for here so oft the muse her harp has strung,
          that not a mountain rears its head unsung.
i beg your pardon for this sally, and will, if i can, continue the rest of my account in plain prose. the second day after we set sail, we passed gallipolis, a fair city, situated in the bay of chersonesus, and much respected by the turks, being the first town they took in europe. at five the next morning, we anchored in the hellespont, between the castles of sestos and abydos, now called the dardanelli. these are now two little ancient castles, but of no strength, being commanded by a rising ground behind them, which, i confess, i should never have taken notice of, if i had not heard it observed by our captain and officers, my imagination being wholly employed by the tragic story, that you are well acquainted with:
the swimming lover, and the nightly bride, how hero lov'd, and how leander died.
verse again!—i am certainly infected by the poetical air i have passed through. that of abydos is undoubtedly very amorous, since that soft passion betrayed the castle into the hands of the turks who besieged it in the reign of orchanes. the governor's daughter, imagining to have seen her future husband in a dream, (though i don't find she had either slept upon bride-cake, or kept st agnes's fast) fancied she saw the dear figure in the form of one of her besiegers; and, being willing to obey her destiny, tossed a note to him over the wall, with the offer of her person, and the delivery of the castle. he shewed it to his general, who consented to try the sincerity of her intentions, and withdrew his army, ordering the young man to return with a select body of men at midnight. she admitted him at the appointed hour; he destroyed the garrison, took the father prisoner, and made her his wife. this town is in asia, first founded by the milesians. sestos is in europe, and was once the principal city of chersonesus. since i have seen this strait, i find nothing improbable in the adventure of leander, or very wonderful in the bridge of boats of xerxes. 'tis so narrow, 'tis not surprising a young lover should attempt to swim, or an ambitious king try to pass his army over it. but then, 'tis so subject to storms, 'tis no wonder the lover perished, and the bridge was broken. from hence we had a full view of mount ida;
where juno once caress'd her am'rous jove, and the world's master lay subdu'd by love.
not many leagues sail from hence, i saw the point of land where poor old hecuba was buried, and about a league from that place is cape janizary, the famous promontory of sigaeum, where we anchored. my curiosity supplied me with strength to climb to the top of it, to see the place where achilles was buried, and where alexander ran naked round his tomb, in honour of him, which, no doubt, was a great comfort to his ghost. i saw there the ruins of a very large city, and found a stone, on which mr w——y plainly distinguished the words of sigaen polin. we ordered this on board the ship; but were shewed others much more curious by a greek priest, tho' a very ignorant fellow, that could give no tolerable account of any thing. on each side the door of this little church ly two large stones, about ten feet long each, five in breadth, and three in thickness. that on the right is a very fine white marble, the side of it beautifully carved in bas-relief; it represents a woman, who seems to be designed for some deity, sitting on a chair with a footstool, and before her another woman, weeping, and presenting to her a young child that she has in her arms, followed by a procession of women with children in the same manner. this is certainly part of a very ancient tomb; but i dare not pretend to give the true explanation of it. on the stone, on the left side, is a very fair inscription; but the greek is too ancient for mr w——y's interpretation. i am very sorry not to have the original in my possession, which might have been purchased of the poor inhabitants for a small sum of money. but our captain assured us, that without having machines made on purpose, 'twas impossible to bear it to the sea-side; and, when it was there, his long-boat would not be large enough to hold it.
the ruins of this great city are now inhabited by poor greek peasants, who wear the sciote habit, the women being in short petticoats, fastened by straps round their shoulders, and large smock sleeves of white linen, with neat shoes and stockings, and on their heads a large piece of muslin, which falls in large folds on their shoulders.—one of my countrymen, mr sands, (whose book i doubt not you have read, as one of the best of its kind) speaking of these ruins, supposes them to have been the foundation of a city begun by constantine, before his building byzantium; but i see no good reason for that imagination, and am apt to believe them much more ancient.
we saw very plainly from this promontory, the river simois rolling from mount ida, and running through a very spacious valley. it is now a considerable river, and is called simores, it is joined in the vale by the scamander, which appeared a small stream half choaked (sic) with mud, but is perhaps large in the winter. this was xanthus amongst the gods, as homer tells us; and 'tis by that heavenly name, the nymph oenone invokes it, in her epistle to paris. the trojan virgins used to offer their first favours to it, by the name of scamander, till the adventure, which monsieur de la fontaine has told so agreeably, abolish'd that heathenish ceremony. when the stream is mingled with the simois, they run together to the sea.
all that is now left of troy is the ground on which it stood; for, i am firmly persuaded, whatever pieces of antiquity may be found round it, are much more modern, and i think strabo says the same thing. however, there is some pleasure in seeing the valley where i imagined the famous duel of menelaus and paris had been fought, and where the greatest city in the world was situated. 'tis certainly the noblest situation that can be found for the head of a great empire, much to be preferred to that of constantinople, the harbour here being always convenient for ships from all parts of the world, and that of constantinople inaccessible almost six months in the year, while the north-wind reigns.
north of the promontory of sigaeum we saw that of rhaeteum, famed for the sepulchre of ajax. while i viewed these celebrated fields and rivers, i admired the exact geography of homer, whom i had in my hand. almost every epithet he gives to a mountain or plain, is still just for it; and i spent several hours here in as agreeable cogitations, as ever don quixote had on mount montesinos. we sailed next night to the shore, where 'tis vulgarly reported troy stood; and i took the pains of rising at two in the morning to view cooly those ruins which are commonly shewed to strangers, and which the turks call eski stamboul, i.e. old constantinople. for that reason, as well as some others, i conjecture them to be the remains of that city begun by constantine. i hired an ass (the only voiture to be had there) that i might go some miles into the country, and take a tour round the ancient walls, which are of a vast extent. we found the remains of a castle on a hill, and of another in a valley, several broken pillars and two pedestals, from which i took these latin inscriptions:
divi. aug. col. et. col. iul. philippensis eorundem et princip. am col. iul. parianae. tribun. milit. coh. xxxii. voluntar. trib. milit. leg. xiii. gem. praefecto equit. alae. i. scubulorum vic. viii.
divi. iuli. flamini c. antonio. m. f. volt. rufo. flamin. div. aug. col. cl. aprens. et. col. iul. philippensis eorundem et princip. item col. iul. parianae trib. milit. coh. xxxii. voluntarior. trib. milit. xiii. gem. praef. equit. alae. i. scubulorum vic. vii.
i do not doubt but the remains of a temple near this place, are the ruins of one dedicated to augustus; and i know not why mr sands calls it a christian temple, since the romans certainly built hereabouts. here are many tombs of fine marble, and vast pieces of granate (sic), which are daily lessened by the prodigious balls that the turks make, from them, for their cannon. we passed that evening the isle of tenedos, once under the patronage of apollo, as he gave it in, himself, in the particulars of his estate, when he courted daphne. it is but ten miles in circuit, but, in those days, very rich and well-peopled, still famous for its excellent wine. i say nothing of tenes, from whom it was called; but naming mytilene, where we passed next, i cannot forbear mentioning lesbos, where sappho sung, and pittacus reigned, famous for the birth of alcaeus, theophrastus and arion, those masters in poetry, philosophy, and music. this was one of the last islands that remained in the christian dominion after the conquest of constantinople by the turks. but need i talk to you of catucuseno, &c. princes that you are as well acquainted with as i am. 'twas with regret i saw us sail from this island into the egean (sic) sea, now the archipelago, leaving scio (the ancient chios) on the left, which is the richest and most populous of these islands, fruitful in cotton, corn and silk, planted with groves of orange and lemon trees, and the arvisian mountain, still celebrated for the nectar that virgil mentions. here is the best manufacture of silks in all turkey. the town is well built, the women famous for their beauty, and shew their faces as in christendom. there are many rich families; though they confine their magnificence to the inside of their houses, to avoid the jealousy of the turks, who have, a bassa here: however, they enjoy a reasonable liberty, and indulge the genius of their country:
and eat, and sing, and dance away their time, fresh as their groves, and happy as their clime.
their chains hang lightly on them, tho' 'tis not long since they were imposed, not being under the turk till 1566. but perhaps 'tis as easy to obey the grand signior as the state of genoa, to whom they were sold by the greek emperor. but i forget myself in these historical touches, which are very impertinent when i write to you. passing the strait between the islands of andros and achaia, now libadia, we saw the promontory of lunium, now called cape colonna, where are yet standing the vast pillars of a temple of minerva. this venerable sight made me think, with double regret, on a beautiful temple of theseus, which, i am assured, was almost entire at athens, till the last campaign in the morea, that the turks filled it with powder, and it was accidentally blown up. you may believe i had a great mind to land on the fam'd peloponnesus, tho' it were only to look on the rivers of asopus, peneus, inachus and eurotas, the fields of arcadia, and other scenes of ancient mythology. but instead of demigods and heroes, i was credibly informed, 'tis now over-run by robbers, and that i should run a great risque (sic) of falling into their hands, by undertaking such a journey through a desert country, for which, however, i have so much respect, that i have much ado to hinder myself from troubling you with its whole history, from the foundation of nycana and corinth, to the last campaign there; but i check the inclination, as i did that of landing. we sailed quietly by cape angelo, once malea, where i saw no remains of the famous temple of apollo. we came that evening in sight of candia: it is very mountainous; we easily distinguished that of ida.—we have virgil's authority, that here were a hundred cities—
—centum urbes habitant magnas—
the chief of them—the scene of monstrous passions.—metellus first conquered this birth-place of his jupiter; it fell afterwards into the hands of —— i am running on to the very siege of candia; and i am so angry with myself, that i will pass by all the other islands with this general reflection, that 'tis impossible to imagine any thing more agreeable than this journey would have been two or three thousand years since, when, after drinking a dish of tea with sappho, i might have gone, the same evening, to visit the temple of homer in chios, and passed this voyage in taking plans of magnificent temples, delineating the miracles of statuaries, and conversing with the most polite and most gay of mankind. alas! art is extinct here; the wonders of nature alone remain; and it was with vast pleasure i observed those of mount etna, whose flame appears very bright in the night many leagues off at sea, and fills the head with a thousand conjectures. however, i honour philosophy too much, to imagine it could turn that of empedocles; and lucian shall never make me believe such a scandal of a man, of whom, lucretius says,
—vix humana videtur stirpe creatus—
we passed trinacria without hearing any of the syrens that homer describes; and, being thrown on neither scylla nor charybdis, came safe to malta, first called melita, from the abundance of honey. it is a whole rock covered with very little earth. the grand master lives here in the state of a sovereign prince; but his strength at sea now is very small. the fortifications are reckoned the best in the world, all cut in the solid rock with infinite expence and labour.—off this island we were tossed by a severe storm, and were very glad, after eight days, to be able to put into porta farine on the african shore, where our ship now rides. at tunis we were met by the english consul who resides here. i readily accepted of the offer of his house there for some days, being very curious to see this part of the world, and particularly the ruins of carthage. i set out in his chaise at nine at night, the moon being at full. i saw the prospect of the country almost as well as i could have done by day-light; and the heat of the sun is now so intolerable, 'tis impossible to travel at any other time. the soil is, for the most part, sandy, but every where fruitful of date, olive, and fig-trees, which grow without art, yet afford the most delicious fruit in the world. there vineyards and melon-fields are inclos'd by hedges of that plant we call indian-fig, which is an admirable fence, no wild beast being able to pass it. it grows a great height, very thick, and the spikes or thorns are as long and sharp as bodkins; it bears a fruit much eaten by the peasants, and which has no ill taste.
it being now the season of the turkish ramadan, or lent, and all here professing, at least the mahometan religion, they fast till the going down of the sun, and spend the night in feasting. we saw under the trees, companies of the country people, eating, singing, and dancing, to their wild music. they are not quite black, but all mulattoes, and the most frightful creatures that can appear in a human figure. they are almost naked, only wearing a piece of coarse serge wrapped about them.—but the women have their arms, to their very shoulders, and their necks and faces, adorned with flowers, stars, and various sorts of figures impressed by gunpowder; a considerable addition to their natural deformity; which is, however, esteemed very ornamental amongst them; and i believe they suffer a good deal of pain by it.
about six miles from tunis, we saw the remains of that noble aqueduct, which carried the water to carthage, over several high mountains, the length of forty miles. there are still many arches entire. we spent two hours viewing it with great attention, and mr w——y assured me that of rome is very much inferior to it. the stones are of a prodigious size, and yet all polished, and so exactly fitted to each other, very little cement has been made use of to join them. yet they may probably stand a thousand years longer, if art is not made use of to pull them down. soon after day-break i arrived at tunis, a town fairly built of very white stone, but quite without gardens, which, they say, were all destroyed when the turks first took it, none having been planted since. the dry land gives a very disagreeable prospect to the eye; and the want of shade contributing to the natural heat of the climate, renders it so excessive, that i have much ado to support it. 'tis true, here is, every noon, the refreshment of the sea-breeze, without which it would be impossible to live; but no fresh water but what is preserved in the cisterns of the rains that fall in the month of september. the women of the town go veiled from head to foot under a black crape, and being mixed with a breed of renegadoes, are said to be many of them fair and handsome. this city was besieged in 1270, by lewis (sic) king of france, who died under the walls of it, of a pestilential fever. after his death, philip, his son, and our prince edward, son of henry iii. raised the siege on honourable terms. it remained under its natural african kings, till betrayed into the hands of barbarossa, admiral of solyman the magnificent. the emperor charles v. expelled barbarossa, but it was recovered by the turk, under the conduct of sinan bassa, in the reign of selim ii. from that time till now, it has remained tributary to the grand signior, governed by a bey, who suffers the name of subject to the turk, but has renounced the subjection, being absolute, and very seldom paying any tribute. the great city of bagdat (sic) is, at this time, in the same circumstances, and the grand signior connives at the loss of these dominions, for fear of losing even the titles of them.
i went very early yesterday morning (after one night's repose) to see the ruins of carthage.—i was, however, half broiled in the sun, and overjoyed to be led into one of the subterranean apartments, which they called, the stables of the elephants, but which i cannot believe were ever designed for that use. i found in them many broken pieces of columns of fine marble, and some of porphyry. i cannot think any body would take the insignificant pains of carrying them thither, and i cannot imagine such fine pillars were designed for the use of stables. i am apt to believe they were summer apartments under their palaces, which the heat of the climate rendered necessary. they are now used as granaries by the country people. while i sat here, from the town of tents not far off, many of the women flocked in to see me, and we were equally entertained with viewing one another. their posture in sitting, the colour of their skin, their lank black hair falling on each side their faces, their features, and the shape of their limbs, differ so little from their country-people the baboons, 'tis hard to fancy them a distinct race; i could not help thinking there had been some ancient alliances between them.
when i was a little refreshed by rest, and some milk and exquisite fruit they brought me, i went up the little hill where once stood the castle of byrsa, and from thence i had a distinct view of the situation of the famous city of carthage, which stood on an isthmus, the sea coming on each side of it. 'tis now a marshy ground on one side, where there are salt ponds. strabo calls carthage forty miles in circumference. there are now no remains of it, but what i have described; and the history of it is too well known to want my abridgement of it. you see, sir, that i think you esteem obedience better than compliments. i have answered your letter by giving you the accounts you desired, and have reserved my thanks to the conclusion. i intend to leave this place to-morrow, and continue my journey through italy and france. in one of those places i hope to tell you, by word of mouth, that i am, your humble servant, &c. &c.
i received yours here, and should thank you for the pleasure you seem to enjoy from my return; but i can hardly forbear being angry at you for rejoicing at what displeases me so much. you will think this but an odd compliment on my side. i'll assure you, 'tis not from insensibility of the joy of seeing my friends; but when i consider, that i must, at the same time, see and hear a thousand disagreeable impertinents; that i must receive and pay visits, make courtesies and assist at tea-tables, where i shall be half killed with questions: and, on the other part, that i am a creature that cannot serve any body, but with insignificant good wishes; and that my presence is not a necessary good to any one member of my native country, i think i might much better have staid where ease and quiet made up the happiness of my indolent life.—i should certainly be melancholy, if i pursued this theme one line farther. i will rather fill the remainder of this paper with the inscriptions on the tables of brass, that are placed on each side of the town-house.
i. t a b l e.
maererum. nostr : : : : : sii : : : : : equidem. primam. omnium. illum. cogitationem. hominum. quam. maxime. primam. occursuram. mihi. provideo. deprecor. ne. quasi. novam. istam. rem. introduci. exhorreseatis. sed. illa. po. tius. cogitetis. quam. multa. in. hac. civitate. novata. sint. et. quidem. statim. ab. origine. urbis. nostrae. in. quod. formas. statusque. res. p. nostra. diducta. sit.
quondam. reges. hanc. tenuere. urbem. ne. tamen. domesticis. successoribus. eam. tradere. contigit. supervenere. alieni. et. quidam. externi. ut. numa. romulo. successerit. ex. sabinis. veniens. vicinus. quidem. sed. tunc. externus. ut. anco. marcio. priseus, tarquinius. propter. temeratum. sanguinem. quod. patre. de. marato. corinthio. natus. eret. et. tarquiniensi. matre. generosa. sed. inopi. ut. quae. tali. marito. necesse. habuerit. succumbere. cum. domi. repelleretur. a. gerendis. honoribus. postquam. romam. migravit. regnum. adeptus. est. huie. quoque. et. filio. nepotive. ejus. nam. et. hoc. inter. auctores. discrepat. incretus. servius. tullius. si. nostros. sequimur. captiva. natus. ocresia. si. tuscos. coeli. quondam. vivennae. sodalis. fidelissimus. omnisque. ejus. casus. comes. postquam. varia. fortuna. exactus. cum. omnibus. reliquis. coeliani. exercitus. etruria. excessit. montem. coelium. occupavit. et. a. duce. suo. coelio. ita. appellitatus. mutatoque. nomine. nam. tusce. mastarna. ei. nomen. erat. ita. appellatus. est. ut. dixi. et. regnum. summa. cum. reip. utilitate. obtinuit. diende. postquam. tarquini. superbi. mores. invisi. civitati. nostrae. esse. coeperunt. qua. ipsius. qua. filiorum ejus nempe. pertaesum. est. mentes. regni. et. ad. consules. annuos. magistratus. administratio. reip. translata. est.
quid. nunc. commemorem. dictaturae, hoc. ipso. consulari. imperium. valentius. repertum. apud. majores. nostros quo. in. asperioribus. bellis. aut. in. civili. motu. difficiliori. uterentur. aut. in. auxilium. plebis. creatos. tribunos. plebei. quid. a. consulibus. ad. decemviros. translatum. imperium. solutoque postea decemvirali. regno. ad. consules. rursus. reditum. quid. im : : : : v ris. distributum. consulare, imperium. tribunosque. militum. consulari. imperio. appellatus. qui. seni. et octoni. crearentur. quid. communicatos. postremo. cum. plebe. honores. non. imperi. solum. sed. sacerdotorum. quoque. jamsi. narrem. bella. a. quibus. coeperint. majores. nostri. et. quo. processerimus. vereor. ne. nimio. insolentior. esse. videar. et. quaesisse. jactationem. gloriae. prolati. imperi. ultra. oceanum. sed. illo. c. porius. revertar. civitatem.
ii. t a b l e.
: : : : : : : : : : : : : : : sane : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : nova : : : divus : aug : : : no : lus. et. patruus. ti. caesar. omnem. florem. ubique. coloniarum. ac. municipiorum. bonorum. scilicet. virorum. et. locupletium. in. hac. curia. esse. voluit. quid. ergo. non. italicus. senator. provinciali, potior. est. jam. vobis. cum. hanc. partem. censurae. meae. approbare. coepero. quid. de. ca. re. sentiam. rebus. ostendam. sed. ne. provinciales. quidem. si. modo. ornare. curiam. poterint. rejiciendos. puto.
ornatissima. ecce. colonia. valentissimaque. riennensium. quam. longo. jam. tempore. senatores. huic. curiae. consert. ex. qua. colonia. inter. paucos. equestris. ordinis. ornamentum. l. restinum. familiarissime. diligo. et. hodieque. in. rebus. meis. detineo. cujus. liberi. fruantur. quaeso. primo. sacerdotiorum. gradu. post. modo. cum. annis. promoturi. dignitatis. suae. incrementa. ut. dirum. nomen. latronis. taceam. et. odi. illud. palestricum. prodiguum. quod. ante. in. domum. consulatum. intulit. quam. colonia. sua. solidum. civitatis. romanae. beneficium. consecuta. est. idem. de fratre. ejus. possum. dicere. miserabili. quidem. indignissimoque. hoc. casu. ut. vobis. utilis. senator. esse. non. possit.
tempus. est. jam. ti. caesar. germanice. detegere. te. patribus. conscriptis. quo. tendat. oratio. tua. jam. enim. ad. extremos. sines. galliae. narbonensis. venisti.
tot. ecce. insignes. juvenes. quot. intueor. non. magis. sunt. poenitenci. senatorib. quam. poenitet. persicum. nobilissimum. virum. amicum. meum. inter. imagines. majorum. suorum. allorogici. nomen. legere. quod. si. hae. ita. esse. consenti. is. quid. ultra. desideratis. quam. ut. vobis. digito. demonstrem. solum. ipsum. ultra. sines. provinciae. narbonensis jam. vobis. senatores. mittere. quando. ex. lugduno. habere. nos. nostri. ordinis. viros. non. poenitet. timide. quidim. p. c. egressus. adsuetos. familiaresque. vobis. provinciarum, terminos. sum. sed. destricte jam comatae. galliae. causa. agenda. est. in. qua. si. quis. hoc. intuetur. quod. bello. per. decem. annos. exercuerunt. divom. julium. idem opponat. centum. annorum. immobilem. fidem. obsequiumque. multis. tripidis. rebus. nostris plusquam. expertum. illi. patri. meo. druso. germaniam. subigenti. tutam. quiete. sua secaramque. a tergo pacem. praestiterunt. et. quidem. cum. ad. census. novo. tum. opere. et. in. adsueto. galliis. ad. bellum. avocatus. esset. quod. opus. quam. arduum. sit. nobis. nunc. cum. maxime. quamvis. nihil. ultra. quam. ut. publice. notae. sint. facultates. nostrae. exquiratur. nimis. magne. experimento. cognoscimus.
i was also shewed without the gate of st justinus, some remains of a roman aqueduct; and behind the monastery of st mary, there are the ruins of the imperial palace, where the emperor claudius was born, and where severus lived. the great cathedral of st john is a good gothic building, and its clock much admired by the germans. in one of the most conspicuous parts of the town, is the late king's statue set up, trampling upon mankind. i cannot forbear saying one word here, of the french statues (for i never intend to mention any more of them) with their gilded full-bottomed wigs. if their king had intended to express, in one image, ignorance, ill taste, and vanity, his sculptors could have made no other figure, so proper for that purpose, as this statue, which represents the odd mixture of an old beau, who had a mind to be a hero, with a bushel of curled hair on his head, and a gilt truncheon in his hand.—the french have been so voluminous on the history of this town, i need say nothing of it. the houses are tolerably well built, and the belle cour well planted, from whence is seen the celebrated joining of the soane and rhone.
"ubi rhodanus ingens amne praerapido fluit "ararque dubitans quo suos fluctus agat."
i have had time to see every thing with great leisure, having been confined several days to this town by a swelling in my throat, the remains of a fever, occasioned by a cold i got in the damps of the alps. the doctors here threaten me with all sorts of distempers, if i dare to leave them; but i, that know the obstinacy of it, think it just as possible to continue my way to paris, with it, as to go about the streets of lyons; and am determined to pursue my journey to-morrow, in spite of doctors, apothecaries, and sore throats.
when you see lady r——, tell her i have received her letter, and will answer it from paris, believing that the place that she would most willingly hear of. i am, &c. &c:
you see i'm just to my word, in writing to you from paris, where i was very much surprised to meet my sister; i need not add, very much pleased. she as little expected to see me as i her (having not received my late letters); and this meeting would shine under the hand of de seuderie; but i shall not imitate his style so far, as to tell you how often we embraced, how she inquired, by what odd chance i returned from constantinople? and i answered her by asking, what adventure brought her to paris? to shorten the story, all questions, and answers, and exclamations, and compliments being over, we agreed upon running about together, and have seen versailles, trianon, marli, and st cloud. we had an order for the water to play for our diversion, and i was followed thither by all the english at paris. i own, versailles appeared to me rather vast than beautiful; and after having seen the exact proportions of the italian buildings, i thought the irregularity of it shocking.
the king's cabinet of antiques and medals, is, indeed, very richly furnished. amongst that collection, none pleased so well, as the apotheosis of germanicus, on a large agate, which is one of the most delicate pieces of the kind that i remember to have seen. i observed some ancient statues of great value. but the nauseous flattery, and tawdry pencil of le brun, are equally disgusting in the gallery. i will not pretend to describe to you the great apartment, the vast variety of fountains, the theatre, the grove of esop's (sic) fables, &c. all which you may read very amply particularized in some of the french authors, that have been paid for these descriptions. trianon, in its littleness, pleased me better than versailles; marli, better than either of them; and st cloud best of all; having the advantage of the seine running at the bottom of the gardens, the great cascade, &c. you may find information in the aforesaid books, if you have any curiosity to know the exact number of the statues, and how many feet they cast up the water.
we saw the king's pictures in the magnificent house of the duke d'antin, who has the care of preserving them till his majesty is of age. there are not many but of the best hands. i looked, with great pleasure on the arch-angel of raphael, where the sentiments of superior beings are as well expressed as in milton. you won't forgive me, if i say nothing of the thuilleries (sic), much finer than our mall; and the cour, more agreeable than our hyde-park, the high trees giving shade in the hottest season. at the louvre, i had the opportunity of seeing the king, accompanied by the duke regent. he is tall, and well shaped but has not the air of holding the crown so many years as his grandfather. and now i am speaking of the court, i must say, i saw nothing in france that delighted me so much, as to see an englishman (at least a briton) absolute at paris, i mean mr law, who treats their dukes and peers extremely de haut en bas, and is treated by them with the utmost submission and respect.—poor souls!—this reflection on their abject slavery, puts me in mind of the place des victoires; but i will not take up your time, and my own, with such descriptions, which are too numerous.
in general, i think paris has the advantage of london, in the neat pavement of the streets, and the regular lighting of them at nights, in the proportion of the streets, the houses being all built of stone, and most of those belonging to people of quality being beautified by gardens. but we certainly may boast of a town very near twice as large; and when i have said that, i know nothing else we surpass it in. i shall not continue here long; if you have any thing to command me during my short stay, write soon, and i shall take pleasure in obeying you. i am, &c. &c.
i am willing to take your word for it, that i shall really oblige you, by letting you know, as soon as possible, my safe passage over the water. i arrived this morning at dover, after being tossed a whole night in the packet-boat, in so violent a manner, that the master, considering the weakness of his vessel, thought it proper to remove the mail, and give us notice of the danger. we called a little fishing boat, which could hardly make up to us; while all the people on board us were crying to heaven. 'tis hard to imagine one's self in a scene of greater horror than on such an occasion: and yet, shall i own it to you? though i was not at all willingly to be drowned, i could not forbear being entertained at the double distress of a fellow-passenger. she was an english lady that i had met at calais, who desired me to let her go over with me in my cabin. she had bought a fine point-head, which she was contriving to conceal from the custom-house officers. when the wind grew high, and our little vessel cracked, she fell very heartily to her prayers, and thought wholly of her soul. when it seemed to abate, she returned to the worldly care of her head-dress, and addressed herself to me—"dear madam, will you take care of this point? if it should be "lost!—ah, lord, we shall all be lost!—lord have mercy on my "soul!—pray, madam, take care of this head-dress." this easy transition from her soul to her head-dress, and the alternate agonies that both gave her, made it hard to determine which she thought of greatest value. but, however, the scene was not so diverting, but i was glad to get rid of it, and be thrown into the little boat, though with some hazard of breaking my neck. it brought me safe hither; and i cannot help looking with partial eyes on my native land. that partiality was certainly given us by nature, to prevent rambling, the effect of an ambitious thirst after knowledge, which we are not formed to enjoy. all we get by it, is a fruitless desire of mixing the different pleasures and conveniencies which are given to the different parts of the world, and cannot meet in any one of them. after having read all that is to be found in the languages i am mistress of, and having decayed my sight by midnight studies, i envy the easy peace of mind of a ruddy milk-maid, who, undisturbed by doubt, hears the sermon, with humility, every sunday, not having confounded the sentiments of natural duty in her head by the vain-inquiries of the schools, who may be more learned, yet, after all, must remain as ignorant. and, after having seen part of asia and africa, and almost made the tour of europe, i think the honest english squire more happy, who verily believes the greek wines less delicious than march beer; that the african fruits have not so fine a flavour as golden pippins; that the beca figuas of italy are not so well tasted as a rump of beef; and that, in short, there is no perfect enjoyment of this life out of old england. i pray god i may think so for the rest of my life; and, since i must be contented with our scanty allowance of day-light, that i may forget the enlivening sun of constantinople. i am, &c. &c.
i have this minute received a letter of yours, sent me from paris. i believe and hope i shall very soon see both you and mr congreve; but as i am here in an inn, where we stay to regulate our march to london, bag and baggage, i shall employ some of my leisure time, in answering that part of yours, that seems to require an answer.
i must applaud your good nature, in supposing, that your pastoral lovers (vulgarly called hay-makers) would have lived in everlasting joy and harmony, if the lightning had not interrupted their scheme of happiness. i see no reason to imagine, that john hughes and sarah drew, were either wiser or more virtuous than their neighbours. that a well-set man of twenty-five should have a fancy to marry a brown woman of eighteen, is nothing marvellous; and i cannot help thinking, that had they married, their lives would have passed in the common track with their fellow parishioners. his endeavouring to shield her from a storm, was a natural action, and what he would have certainly done for his horse, if he had been in the same situation. neither am i of opinion, that their sudden death was a reward of their mutual virtue. you know the jews were reproved for thinking a village destroyed by fire, more wicked than those that had escaped the thunder. time and chance happen to all men. since you desire me to try my skill in an epitaph, i think the following lines perhaps more just, tho' not so poetical as yours.
         here lies john hughes and sarah drew;
          perhaps you'll say, what's that to you?
          believe me, friend, much may be said
          on that poor couple that are dead.
          on sunday next they should have married;
          but see how oddly things are carried!
          on thursday last it rain'd and lighten'd,
          these tender lovers sadly frighten'd,
          shelter'd beneath the cocking hay,
          in hopes to pass the time away,
          but the bold thunder found them out,
          (commission'd for that end no doubt)
          and seizing on their trembling breath,
          consign'd them to the shades of death.
          who knows if 'twas not kindly done?
          for had they seen the next year's fun,
          a beaten wife and cockold swain
          had jointly curs'd the marriage chain:
          now they are happy in their doom,
          for pope has wrote upon their tomb.
i confess, these sentiments are not altogether so heroic as yours; but i hope you will forgive them in favour of the two last lines. you see how much i esteem the honour you have done them; though i am not very impatient to have the same, and had rather continue to be your stupid living humble servant, than be celebrated by all the pens in europe.
i would write to mr c——; but suppose you will read this to him, if he inquires after me.
i am really almost tired with the life of vienna. i am not, indeed, an enemy to dissipation and hurry, much less to amusement and pleasure; but i cannot endure, long, even pleasure, when it is fettered with formality, and assumes the air of system. 'tis true i have had here some very agreeable connections; and what will perhaps surprise you, i have particular pleasure in my spanish acquaintances, count oropesa and general puebla. these two noblemen are much in the good graces of the emperor, and yet they seem to be brewing mischief. the court of madrid cannot reflect, without pain, upon the territories that were cut off from the spanish monarchy by the peace of utrecht, and it seems to be looking wishfully out, for an opportunity of getting them back again. that is a matter about which i trouble myself very little; let the court be in the right or in the wrong, i like mightily the two counts its ministers. i dined with them both some days ago at count wurmbrand's, an aulic counsellor, and a man of letters, who is universally esteemed here. but the first man at this court, in point of knowledge and abilities, is certainly count schlick, high chancellor of bohemia, whose immense reading is accompanied with a fine taste and a solid judgment; he is a declared enemy to prince eugene, and a warm friend to the honest hot-headed marshal staremberg. one of the most accomplished men i have seen at vienna, is the young count terracco, who accompanies the amiable prince of portugal. i am almost in love with them both, and wonder to see such elegant manners, and such free and generous sentiments in two young men that have hitherto seen nothing but their own country. the count is just such a roman-catholic as you; he succeeds greatly with the devout beauties here; his first overtures in gallantry are disguised under the luscious strains of spiritual love, that were sung formerly by the sublimely voluptuous fenelon, and the tender madam guion, who turned the fire of carnal love to divine objects: thus the count begins with the spirit, and ends generally with the flesh, when he makes his addresses to holy virgins.
i made acquaintance yesterday with the famous poet rousseau, who lives here under the peculiar protection of prince eugene, by whose liberality he subsists. he passes here for a free-thinker, and, what is still worse in my esteem, for a man whose heart does not feel the encomiums he gives to virtue and honour in his poems. i like his odes mightily; they are much superior to the lyric productions of our english poets, few of whom have made any figure in that kind of poetry. i don't find that learned men abound here; there is, indeed, a prodigious number of alchymists (sic) at vienna; the philosopher's stone is the great object of zeal and science; and those who have more reading and capacity than the vulgar, have transported their superstition (shall i call it?) or fanaticism, from religion to chymistry (sic); and they believe in a new kind of transubstantiation, which is designed to make the laity as rich as the other kind has made the priesthood. this pestilential passion has already ruined several great houses. there is scarcely a man of opulence or fashion, that has not an alchymist in his service; and even the emperor is supposed to be no enemy to this folly, in secret, though he has pretended to discourage it in public.
prince eugene was so polite as to shew me his library yesterday; we found him attended by rousseau, and his favourite count bonneval, who is a man of wit, and is here thought to be a very bold and enterprizing (sic), spirit. the library, though not very ample, is well chosen; but as the prince will admit into it no editions but what are beautiful and pleasing to the eye, and there are, nevertheless, numbers of excellent books that are but indifferently printed, this finikin (sic) and foppish taste makes many disagreeable chasms in this collection. the books are pompously bound in turkey leather; and two of the most famous book-binders of paris were expressly sent for to do this work. bonneval pleasantly told me, that there were several quartos, on the art of war, that were bound with the skins of spahis and janizaries: and this jest, which was indeed elegant, raised a smile of pleasure on the grave countenance of the famous warrior. the prince, who is a connoisseur in the fine arts, shewed me, with particular pleasure, the famous collection of portraits that formerly belonged to fouquet, and which he purchased at an excessive price. he has augmented it with a considerable number of new acquisitions; so that he has now in his possession such a collection in that kind, as you will scarcely find in any ten cabinets in europe. if i told you the number, you will say that i make an indiscreet use of the permission to lie, which is more or less given to travellers, by the indulgence of the candid.
count tarracco is just come in.—he is the only person i have accepted, this morning, in my general order to receive no company.—i think i see you smile;—but i am not so far gone as to stand in need of absolution; though as the human heart is deceitful, and the count very agreeable, you may think, that even though i should not want an absolution, i would, nevertheless, be glad to have an indulgence.—no such thing.—however, as i am a heretic, and you no confessor, i shall make no declarations on this head.—the design of the count's visit is a ball;—more pleasure.—i shall be surfeited. adieu, &c.
when i wrote to you last, belgrade was in the hands of the turks; but, at this present moment, it has changed masters, and is in the hands of the imperialists. a janizary, who, in nine days, and yet without any wings but what a panic terror seems to have furnished, arrived at constantinople from the army of the turks before belgrade, brought mr w—— the news of a complete victory obtained by the imperialists, commanded by prince eugene, over the ottoman troops. it is said, the prince has discovered great conduct and valour in this action; and i am particularly glad that the voice of glory and duty has call'd him from the—(note in the published book: here several words of the manuscript are effaced.)—two day's after the battle, the town surrendered. the consternation, which this defeat has occasioned here, is inexpressible; and the sultan, apprehending a revolution, from the resentment and indignation of the people, fomented by certain leaders, has begun his precautions, after the goodly fashion of this blessed government, by ordering several persons to be strangled, who were the objects of his royal suspicion. he has also ordered his treasurer to advance some months pay to the janizaries, which seems the less necessary, as their conduct has been bad in this campaign, and their licentious ferocity seems pretty well tamed by the public contempt. such of them as return in straggling and fugitive parties to the metropolis, have not spirit nor credit enough to defend themselves from the insults of the mob; the very children taunt them, and the populace spit in their faces as they pass. they refused, during the battle, to lend their assistance to save the baggage and the military chest, which, however, were defended by the bashaws and their retinue, while the janizaries and spahis were nobly employed in plundering their own camp.
you see here, that i give you a very handsome return for your obliging letter. you entertain me with a most agreeable account of your amiable connexions (sic) with men of letters and taste, and of the delicious moments you pass in their society under the rural shade; and i exhibit to you, in return, the barbarous spectacle of turks and germans cutting one another's throats. but what can you expect from such a country as this, from which the muses have fled, from which letters seem eternally banished, and in which you see, in private scenes, nothing pursued as happiness, but the refinements of an indolent voluptuousness; and where those who act upon the public theatre live in uncertainty, suspicion, and terror? here, pleasure, to which i am no enemy, when it is properly seasoned, and of a good composition, is surely of the coying kind. veins of wit, elegant conversation, easy commerce, are unknown among the turks; and yet they seem capable of all these, if the vile spirit of their government did not stifle genius, damp curiosity, and suppress an hundred passions, that embellish and render life agreeable. the luscious passion of the seraglio is the only one almost that is gratified here to the full; but it is blended so with the surly spirit of despotism in one of the parties, and with the dejection and anxiety which this spirit produces in the other, that, to one of my way of thinking, it cannot appear otherwise than as a very mixed kind of enjoyment. the women here are not, indeed, so closely confined as many have related; they enjoy a high degree of liberty, even in the bosom of servitude, and they have methods of evasion and disguise, that are very favourable to gallantry; but, after all, they are still under uneasy apprehensions of being discovered; and a discovery exposes them to the most merciless rage of jealousy, which is here a monster that cannot be satiated but with blood. the magnificence and riches that reign in the apartments of the ladies of fashion here, seem to be one of their chief pleasures, joined with their retinue of female slaves, whose music, dancing, and dress, amuse them highly; but there is such an air of form and stiffness amidst this grandeur, as hinders it from pleasing me at long-run, however, i was dazzled with it at first sight. this stiffness and formality of manners are peculiar to the turkish ladies; for the grecian belles are of quite another character and complexion; with them, pleasure appears in more engaging forms; and their persons, manners, conversation and amusements, are very far from being destitute of elegance and ease.
i received the news of mr addison's being declared secretary of state with the less surprise, in that i know that post was almost offered to him before. at that time he declined it; and i really believe that he would have done well to have declined it now. such a post as that, and such a wife as the countess, do not seem to be, in prudence, eligible for a man that is asthmatic; and we may see the day, when he will be heartily glad to resign them both. it is well that he laid aside the thoughts of the voluminous dictionary, of which i have heard you or somebody else frequently make mention. but no more on that subject; i would not have said so much, were i not assured that this letter will come safe and unopened to hand. i long much to tread upon english ground, that i may see you and mr congreve, who render that ground classic ground; nor will you refuse our present secretary a part of that merit, whatever reasons you may have to be dissatisfied with him in other respects. you are the three happiest poets i ever heard of; one a secretary of state, the other enjoying leisure, with dignity, in two lucrative employments; and you, though your religious profession is an obstacle to court promotion, and disqualifies you from filling civil employments, have found the philosopher's stone; since, by making the iliad pass through your poetical crucible into an english form, without losing aught of it's original beauty, you have drawn the golden current of pactolus to twickenham. i call this finding the philosopher's stone, since you alone found out the secret, and nobody else has got into it. a——n and t——l tried it, but their experiments failed; and they lost, if not their money, at least a certain portion of their fame in the trial—while you touched the mantle of the divine bard, and imbibed his spirit. i hope we shall have the odyssey soon from your happy hand; and i think i shall follow, with singular pleasure, the traveller ulysses, who was an observer of men and manners, when he travels in your harmonious numbers. i love him much better than the hot-headed son of peleus, who bullied his general, cried for his mistress, and so on. it is true, the excellence of the iliad does not depend upon his merit or dignity; but i wish, nevertheless, that homer had chosen a hero somewhat less pettish and less fantastic: a perfect hero is chimerical and unnatural, and consequently uninstructive; but it is also true, that while the epic hero ought to be drawn with the infirmities that are the lot of humanity, he ought never to be represented as extremely absurd. but it becomes me ill to play the critic; so i take my leave of you for this time, and desire you will believe me, with the highest esteem, your's, &c.
i have been running about paris at a strange rate with my sister, and strange sights have we seen. they are, at least, strange sights to me; for, after having been accustomed to the gravity of turks, i can scarce look with an easy and familiar aspect at the levity and agility of the airy phantoms that are dancing about me here; and i often think that i am at a puppet-shew, amidst the representations of real life. i stare prodigiously, but nobody remarks it, for every body stares here, staring is a-la-mode—there is a stare of attention and interet, a stare of curiosity, a stare of expectation, a stare of surprise; and it will greatly amuse you to see what trifling objects excite all this staring. this staring would have rather a solemn kind of air, were it not alleviated by grinning; for at the end of a stare, there comes always a grin; and very commonly, the entrance of a gentleman or lady into a room is accompanied with a grin, which is designed to express complacence and social pleasure, but really shews nothing more than a certain contortion of muscles, that must make a stranger laugh really, as they laugh artificially. the french grin is equally remote from the cheerful serenity of a smile, and the cordial mirth of an honest english horse-laugh. i shall not perhaps stay here long enough to form a just idea of french manners and characters, though this i believe would require but little study, as there is no great depth in either. it appears, on a superficial view, to be a frivolous, restless, and agreeable people. the abbot is my guide, and i could not easily light upon a better; he tells me, that here the women form the character of the men, and i am convinced in the persuasion of this, by every company into which i enter. there seems here to be no intermediate state between infancy and manhood; for as soon as the boy has quit his leading-strings, he is set agog in the world; the ladies are his tutors, they make the first impressions, which, generally remain, and they render the men ridiculous, by the imitation of their humours and graces; so that dignity in manners, is a rare thing here before the age of sixty. does not king david say somewhere, that man walketh in a vain shew? i think he does; and i am sure this is peculiarly true of the frenchman—but he walks merrily, and seems to enjoy the vision; and may he not therefore be esteemed more happy than many of our solid thinkers, whose brows are furrowed by deep reflection, and whose wisdom is so often clothed with a misty mantle of spleen and vapours?
what delights me most here, is a view of the magnificence, often accompanied with taste, that reigns in the king's palaces and gardens; for tho' i don't admire much the architecture, in which there is great irregularity and want of proportion, yet the statues, paintings, and other decorations, afford me high entertainment. one of the pieces of antiquity that struck me most in the gardens of versailles, was the famous colossean statue of jupiter, the workmanship of myron, which mark anthony carried away from samos, and augustus ordered to be placed in the capitol. it is of parian marble; and though it has suffered in the ruin of time, it still preserves striking lines of majesty. but surely, if marble could feel, the god would frown with a generous indignation, to see himself transported from the capitol into a french garden; and, after having received the homage of the roman emperors, who laid their laurels at his feet when they returned from their conquests, to behold now nothing but frizzled beaus passing by him with indifference.
i propose setting out soon from this place, so that you are to expect no more letters from this side of the water; besides, i am hurried to death, and my head swims with that vast variety of objects which i am obliged to view with such rapidity, the shortness of my time not allowing me to examine them at my leisure. there is here an excessive prodigality of ornaments and decorations, that is just the opposite extreme to what appears in our royal gardens; this prodigality is owing to the levity and inconstancy of the french taste, which always pants after something new, and thus heaps ornament upon ornament, without end or measure. it is time, however, that i should put an end to my letter; so i wish you good night, and am, &c.
i am charmed, sir, with your obliging letter; and you may perceive, by the largeness of my paper, that i intend to give punctual answers to all your questions, at least if my french will permit me; for, as it is a language i do not understand to perfection, so i much fear, that, for want of expressions, i shall be quickly obliged to finish. keep in mind, therefore, that i am writing in a foreign language, and be sure to attribute all the impertinencies and triflings (sic) dropping from my pen, to the want of proper words for declaring my thoughts, but by no means to dulness, or natural levity.
these conditions being thus agreed and settled, i begin with telling you, that you have a true notion of the alcoran, concerning which the greek priests (who are the greatest scoundrels in the universe) have invented, out of their own heads, a thousand ridiculous stories, in order to decry the law of mahomet; to run it down, i say, without any examination, or so much as letting the people read it; being afraid, that if once they began to sift the defects of the alcoran, they might not stop there, but proceed to make use of their judgment about their own legends and fictions. in effect, there is nothing so like as the fables of the greeks and of the mahometans; and the last have multitudes of saints, at whose tombs miracles are by them said to be daily performed; nor are the accounts of the lives of those blessed musselmans much less stuffed with extravagancies, than the spiritual romances of the greek papas.
as to your next inquiry, i assure you, 'tis certainly false, though commonly believed in our parts of the world, that mahomet excludes women from any share in a future happy state. he was too much a gentleman, and loved the fair sex too well, to use them so barbarously. on the contrary, he promises a very fine paradise to the turkish women. he says, indeed, that this paradise will be a separate place from that of their husbands; but i fancy the most part of them won't like it the worse for that; and that the regret of this separation will not render their paradise the less agreeable. it remains to tell you, that the virtues which mahomet requires of the women, to merit the enjoyment of future happiness, are, not to live in such a manner as to become useless to the world, but to employ themselves, as much as possible, in making little musselmans. the virgins, who die virgins, and the widows who marry not again, dying in mortal sin, are excluded out of paradise: for women, says he, not being capable to manage the affairs of state, nor to support the fatigues of war, god has not ordered them to govern or reform the world; but he has entrusted them with an office which is not less honourable; even that of multiplying the human race: and such as, out of malice or laziness, do not make it their business to bear or to breed children, fulfil not the duty of their vocation, and rebel against the commands of god. here are maxims for you, prodigiously contrary to those of your convents. what will become of your st catharines, your st theresas, your st claras, and the whole bead-roll of your holy virgins and widows; who, if they are to be judged by this system of virtue, will be found to have been infamous creatures, that passed their whole lives in most abominable libertinism.
i know not what your thoughts may be, concerning a doctrine so extraordinary with respect to us; but i can truly inform you, sir, that the turks are not so ignorant as we fancy them to be in matters of politics, or philosophy, or even of gallantry. 'tis true, that military discipline, such as now practised in christendom, does not mightily suit them. a long peace has plunged them into an universal sloth. content with their condition, and accustomed to boundless luxury, they are become great enemies to all manner of fatigues. but, to make amends, the sciences flourish among them. the effendis (that is to say, the learned) do very well deserve this name: they have no more faith in the in inspiration of mahomet, than in the infallibility of the pope. they make a frank profession of deism among themselves, or to those they can trust; and never speak of their law but as of a politic institution, fit now to be observed by wise men, however at first introduced by politicians and enthusiasts.
if i remember right, i think i have told you, in some former letter, that, at belgrade, we lodged with a great and rich effendi, a man of wit and learning, and of a very agreeable humour. we were in his house about a month, and he did constantly eat with us, drinking wine without any scruple. as i rallied him a little on this subject, he answered me, smiling, that all creatures in the world were made for the pleasure of man; and that god would not have let the vine grow, were it a sin to taste of its juice; but that, nevertheless, the law, which forbids the use of it to the vulgar, was very wise, because such sort of folks have not sense enough to take it with moderation. this effendi appeared no stranger to the parties that prevail among us: nay, he seemed to have some knowledge of our religious disputes, and even of our writers; and i was surprised to hear him ask, among other things, how mr toland did.
my paper, large as it is, draws towards an end. that i may not go beyond its limits, i must leap from religions to tulips, concerning which you ask me news. their mixture produces surprising effects. but, what is to be observed most surprising, are the experiments of which you speak concerning animals, and which are tried here every day. the suburbs of pera, jophana, and galata, are collections of strangers from all countries of the universe. they have so often intermarried, that this forms several races of people, the oddest imaginable. there is not one single family of natives that can value itself on being unmixed. you frequently see a person, whose father was born a grecian, the mother an italian, the grandfather a frenchman, the grandmother an armenian, and their ancestors english, muscovites, asiatics, &c.
this mixture produces creatures more extraordinary than you can imagine; nor could i ever doubt, but there were several different species of men; since the whites, the woolly and the long-haired blacks, the small-eyed tartars and chinese, the beardless brasilians, and (to name no more) the oily-skinned yellow nova zemblians, have as specific differences, under the same general kind, as grey-hounds, mastiffs, spaniels, bull-dogs, or the race of my little diana, if nobody is offended at the comparison. now, as the various intermixing of these latter animals causes mongrels, so mankind have their mongrels too, divided and subdivided into endless sorts. we have daily proofs of it here, as i told you before. in the same animal is not seldom remarked the greek perfidiousness, the italian diffidence, the spanish arrogance, the french loquacity; and, all of a sudden, he is seized with a fit of english thoughtfulness, bordering a little upon dulness, which many of us have inherited from the stupidity of our saxon progenitors. but the family which charms me most, is that which proceeds from the fantastical conjunction of a dutch male with a greek female. as these are natures opposite in extremes, 'tis a pleasure to observe how the differing atoms are perpetually jarring together in the children, even so as to produce effects visible in their external form. they have the large black eyes of the country, with the fat, white, fishy flesh of holland, and a lively air streaked with dulness. at one and the same time, they shew that love of expensiveness, so universal among the greeks, and an inclination to the dutch frugality. to give an example of this; young women ruin themselves, to purchase jewels for adorning their heads, while they have not the heart to buy new shoes, or rather slippers for their feet, which are commonly in a tattered condition; a thing so contrary to the taste of our english women, that it is for shewing how neatly their feet are dressed, and for shewing this only, they are so passionately enamoured with their hoop petticoats. i have abundance of other singularities to communicate to you; but i am at the end, both of my french and my paper.

